GENERAL  
FINANCIAL RULES  

2017 
 

 

 

Updated up to 31.07.2024 

 1 



Ch.-1 - INTRODUCTION 

 
Rule 1 Short Title and Commencement: These The term shall include a Head of 

rules may be called General Financial Department and also an 
Rules, 2017 and they shall come into Administrator; 
force at once and shall be applicable to all  
Central Government (xi) “Department of the Government 
Ministries/Departments, attached and of India” means any of the 
subordinate bodies. The provisions Ministries, Departments, 
contained in GFRs are deemed to be Secretariats and Offices as notified 
applicable to Autonomous Bodies except from time to time and listed in the 
to the extent the bye-laws of an First Schedule to the Government of 
Autonomous Body provides for separate India (Allocation of Business Rules); 
Financial Rules which have been (xii) “Drawing and Disbursing 
approved by the Government. Officer” means a Head of Office 

Rule 2 Definition: In these rules, unless the and also any other Gazetted 
context otherwise requires- Officer so designated by a 
(i) “Accounts Officer” means the Department of the Central 

Head of an Office of Accounts or Government, a Head of 
the Head of a Pay and Accounts Department or an Administrator, 
Office set up under the scheme of to draw bills and make payments 
departmentalization of accounts; on behalf of the Central 

(ii) “Administrator” means Government. The term shall also 
Administrator of a Union include a Head of Department or 
Territory, by whatever name an Administrator where he 
designated; himself discharges such function; 

(iii) “Appropriation” means the (xiii) “Ministry of Finance” means 
assignment, to meet specified the Ministry of Finance of the 
expenditure, of funds included in Central Government; 
a primary unit of appropriation; (xiv) “Financial Year” means the 

(iv) “Audit Officer” means the Head year beginning on the 1st of April 
of an Office of Audit; and ending on the 31st of March 

(v) “Competent Authority” means, following; 
in respect of the power to be (xv) “Government” means the 
exercised under any of these Central Government; 
Rules, the President or such (xvi) “Government Account” means 
other authority to which the the account relating to the 
power is delegated by or under Consolidated Fund, the 
these Rules, Delegation of Contingency Fund and the Public 
Financial Power Rules or any Account; as defined in these 
other general or special orders rules; 
issued by the Government of (xvii) “Head of the Department’’ 
India; means an authority or person 

(vi) “Comptroller and Auditor (not below the rank of a Deputy 
General” means the Comptroller Secretary to the Government of 
and Auditor General of India; India), declared by the concerned 

(vii) “Consolidated Fund” means Department in the Government of 
the Consolidated Fund of India India as a Head of Department in 
referred to in Article 266 (1) of the relation to an identifiable 
Constitution; establishment or establishments 

(viii) “Constitution” means the to exercise the delegated 
Constitution of India; financial powers under these 

(ix) “Contingency Fund” means the Rules; 
Contingency Fund of India (xviii) “Head of Office” means (a) a 
established under the Gazetted Officer declared as 
Contingency Fund of India Act, such in the Delegation of 
1950, in terms of Article 267 (1) of Financial Powers Rules and (b) 
the Constitution; any other authority declared as 

(x) “Controlling Officer” means an such under any general or 
officer entrusted by a Department special orders of the competent 
of the Central Government with authority; 
the responsibility of controlling (xix) “Local Body” means an 
the incurring of expenditure authority legally entitled or 
and/or the collection of revenue. specially empowered by 

 2 



Government to administer a local life; 
fund; (xxxii) OPEX model: In the OPEX 

(xx) “Local Fund” means a local fund model, the Seller provides the 
as defined in Rule 652 of the goods, maintains it and also 
Treasury Rules; provides the consumables as 

(xxi) “Non-recurring expenditure” required and finally takes back 
means expenditure other than the goods after useful / 
recurring expenditure; contracted life. The expenditure 

(xxii) “President” means the is made by the Buyer in a 
President of India; staggered manner as per the 

(xxiii) “Primary unit of appropriation” terms and conditions of the 
means a primary unit of contract. 
appropriation referred to in Rule 8  
of the Delegation of Financial  
Powers Rules; Rule 3 Interdepartmental consultations: 

(xxiv) “Public Account” means the When the subject of a case concerns 
Public Account of India referred more than one Department, no order shall 
to in Article 266 (2) of the be issued until all such Departments have 
Constitution; concurred, or, failing such concurrence, a 

(xxv) “Public Works” means civil/ decision has been taken by or under the 
electrical works including public authority of the Cabinet. In this regard it is 
buildings, public services, clarified that every case in which a 
transport infrastructure etc., both decision, if taken in one Department, is 
original and repair works and any likely to affect the transaction of business 
other project, including allotted to another Department, shall also 
infrastructure which is for the use be deemed to be a case which concerns 
of general public; more than one Department. 

(xxvi) “Re-appropriation” means the Rule 4 Departmental Regulations of financial 
transfer of funds from one character: All Departmental regulations, 
primary unit of appropriation to in so far as they embody orders or 
another such unit; instructions of a financial character or 

(xxvii) “Recurring expenditure” have important financial bearing, must 
means the expenditure which is invariably be made by, or with the 
incurred at periodical intervals for approval of the Ministry of Finance. 
the same purpose. Expenditures Rule 5 Removal of Doubts: Where a doubt 
other than recurring expenditure arises as to the interpretation of any of the 
are non-recurring expenditure; provisions of these Rules, the matter shall 

(xxviii) “Reserve Bank” means the be referred to the Ministry of Finance for 
Reserve Bank of India or any decision. 
office or agency of the Reserve Rule 6 Modifications: 
Bank of India and includes any (i) The systems and procedures 
Bank acting as the agent of the established by these Rules are 
Reserve Bank of India in subject to general or special 
accordance with the provisions of instructions/ orders, which the 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, Ministry of Finance may issue 
1934 (Act II of 1934); from time to time. 

(xxix) “Subordinate authority” means (ii) The systems and procedures 
a Department of the Central established by these Rules may 
Government or any authority be modified by any other 
subordinate to the President; authority only with the express 

(xxx) “Treasury Rules” means the approval of the Ministry of 
Treasury Rules of the Central Finance. 
Government;  

(xxxi) CAPEX model: In the CAPEX  
Model, Capital expenditures is 
used by the buyer to straightway 
purchase goods followed by  
procurement  of consumables, 
arranging comprehensive 
maintenance contract after 
warranty period and finally 
disposing the product after useful 

 3 



Ch.-2 - GENERAL SYSTEM OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
  
Rule 7 All moneys received by or on behalf of the down in the regulations of the 

Government either as dues of Department responsible for the same. 
Government or for deposit, remittance or Rule 11  (2) In Departments in which officers are 
otherwise, shall be brought into required to receive moneys on behalf of 
Government Account without delay, in Government and issue receipts therefore 
accordance with such general or special in Form GAR-6 the departmental 
rules as may be issued under Articles 150 regulations should provide for the 
and 283 (1) of the Constitution. maintenance of a proper account of the 

Rule 8 (1) receipt and issue of the receipt books, the 
(i) Under Article 284 of the number of receipt books to be issued at a 

Constitution all moneys received time to each officer and a check with the 
by or deposited with any officer officer’s accounts of the used books 
employed in connection with the when returned. 
affairs of the Union in his capacity Rule 12 Amounts due to Government shall not be 
as such, other than revenues or left outstanding without sufficient 
public moneys raised or received reasons. Where such amounts appear to 
by Government, shall be paid into be irrecoverable, the orders of the 
the Public Account. competent authority shall be obtained for 

(ii) All moneys received by or their adjustment. 
deposited with the Supreme Rule 13 Unless specially authorized by any rule or 
Court of India or with any other order made by competent authority, no 
Court, other than a High Court, sums shall be credited as revenue by 
within a Union Territory, shall debit to a suspense head. The credit 
also be dealt with in accordance must follow and not precede actual 
with Clause (i) of sub-rule (1). realization. 

Rule 8 (2) The Head of Account to which such Rule 14 Subject to any general or special orders 
moneys shall be credited and the issued by a Department of the Central 
withdrawal of moneys therefrom shall be Government, an Administrator or a Head 
governed by the relevant provisions of of a Department responsible for the 
Government Accounting Rules 1990 and collection of revenue shall keep the 
the Central Government Account Finance Ministry fully informed of the 
(Receipts and Payments) Rules, 1983 or progress of collection of revenue under 
such other general or special orders as his control and of all important variations 
may be issued in this behalf. in such collections as compared with the 

Rule 9 It is the duty of the Department of the Budget Estimates. 
Central Government concerned to ensure Rule 15 (1) Rents of buildings and lands.  When 
that the receipts and dues of the the maintenance of any rentable building 
Government are correctly and promptly is entrusted to a civil department, other 
assessed, collected and duly credited to than the Central Public Works 
the Consolidated Fund or Public Account Department, the Administrator or the 
as the case may be. Head of the Department concerned shall 

Rule 10 The Controlling Officer shall arrange to be responsible for the due recovery of the 
obtain from his subordinate officers rent thereof. 
monthly accounts and returns in suitable Rule 15 (2) The procedure for the assessment 
form claiming credit for the amounts paid and recovery of rent of any building hired 
into the treasury or bank as the case may out will be regulated generally by the 
be, or otherwise accounted for, and rules applicable to buildings under the 
compare them with the statements of direct charge of the Central Public Works 
credits furnished by the Accounts Officer Department. 
to see that the amounts reported as Rule 15 (3) The detailed rules and procedure, 
collected have been duly credited. regarding the demand and recovery of 
Accordingly, each Accounts Officer will rent of Government buildings and lands, 
send an extract from his accounts are contained in the departmental 
showing the amounts brought to credit in regulations of the departments in charge 
the accounts in each month to the of those buildings. 
Controlling Officer concerned. Rule 16 (1) Fines. Every authority having the 

Rule 11  (1) Detailed rules and procedure power to impose and/ or realize a fine 
regarding assessment, collection, shall ensure that the money is realized, 
allocation, remission and abandonment duly checked and deposited into a 
of revenue and other receipts shall be laid  treasury or bank as the case may be. 

 4 



Rule 16 (2) Every authority having the power to economy and see that all relevant 
refund fines shall ensure that the refunds financial rules and regulations are 
are checked and no double refunds of observed, by his own office and by 
amounts of fines collected or refunds of subordinate disbursing officers. Among 
fines not actually paid into a treasury or the principles on which emphasis is 
bank as the case may be, are made generally laid are the following:- 

Rule 17 Miscellaneous Demands. Accounts (i) Every officer is expected to 
Officers shall watch the realization of exercise the same vigilance in 
miscellaneous demands of Government, respect of expenditure incurred 
not falling under the ordinary revenue from public moneys as a person 
administration, such as contributions of ordinary prudence would 
from State Governments, Local Funds, exercise in respect of 
contractors and others towards expenditure of his own money. 
establishment charges. (ii) The expenditure should not be 

Rule 18 Remission of Revenue. A claim to prima facie more than the 
revenue shall not be remitted or occasion demands. 
abandoned save with the sanction of the (iii) No authority should exercise its 
competent authority. powers of sanctioning 

Rule 19 (1) Subject to any general or special expenditure to pass an order 
orders issued by the Government which will be directly or indirectly 
Departments of the Central Government, to its own advantage. 
Administrators and Heads of (iv) Expenditure from public moneys 
Departments, other than those in the should not be incurred for the 
Department of Posts, shall submit benefit of a particular person or a 
annually on the 1st of June to the Audit section of the people, unless – 
Officer and the Accounts Officer (a) a claim for the amount could 
concerned, statements showing the be enforced in a Court of 
remissions of revenue and abandonment Law, or 
of claims to revenue sanctioned during (b) the expenditure is in 
the preceding year by competent pursuance of a recognized 
authorities in exercise of the discretionary policy or custom. 
powers vested in them otherwise than by Rule 22 Expenditure from Public Funds. No 
law or rule having the force of law, authority may incur any expenditure or 
provided that individual remissions below enter into any liability involving 
Rupees one thousand need not be expenditure or transfer of moneys for 
included in the statements. investment or deposit from public funds 

Rule 19 (2)For inclusion in the statements (Consolidated Fund / Contingency Fund 
referred to in Rule 19 (1) above, and the Public Accounts) unless the 
remissions and abandonments should be same has been sanctioned by a 
classified broadly with reference to the competent authority. 
grounds on which they were sanctioned Rule 23 Delegation of Financial Powers. The 
and a total figure should be given for each financial powers of the Government have 
class. A brief explanation of the been delegated to various subordinate 
circumstances leading to the remission authorities vide Delegation of Financial 
should be added in the case of each Powers Rules as amended from time to 
class. time. The financial powers of the 

Rule20 Departments of the Central Government Government, which have not been 
and Administrators may make rules delegated to a subordinate authority, 
defining remissions and abandonments shall vest in the Finance Ministry. 
of revenue for the purpose of Rule 19 Rule 24 Consultation with Financial Advisers. 
above. All draft memoranda for Expenditure 

 Finance Committee or Public Investment 
I. GENERAL PRINCIPLES RELATING TO Bureau or Committee on Establishment 

EXPENDITURE AND PAYMENT OF Expenditure and Cabinet Committee for 
MONEY Economic Affairs or Cabinet shall be 

 circulated by the Ministry or Department 
Rule 21 Standards of financial propriety. Every concerned after consultation with the 

officer incurring or authorizing concerned Financial Adviser of the 
expenditure from public moneys should Ministry or Department. A confirmation to 
be guided by high standards of financial this effect shall be included in the draft 
propriety. Every officer should also memorandum at the circulation stage. 
enforce financial order and strict  

 5 



Rule 25 (1) Provision of funds for sanction. All easement or privilege of such 
sanctions to the expenditure shall concessions, or 
indicate the details of the provisions in the  
relevant grant or appropriation wherefrom (ii) involves relinquishment of 
such expenditure is to be met. revenue in any way 

Rule 25 (2) All proposals for sanction to Rule 29 Procedure for communication of 
expenditure, shall indicate whether such sanctions. All financial sanctions and 
expenditure can be met by valid orders issued by a competent authority 
appropriation or re- appropriation. shall be communicated to the Audit 

Rule 25 (3) In cases where it becomes necessary Officer and the Accounts Officer. The 
to issue a sanction to expenditure before procedure to be followed for 
funds are communicated, the sanction communication of financial sanctions and 
should specify that such expenditure is orders will be as under:- 
subjected to funds being communicated (i) All financial sanctions issued by a 
in the budget of the year. Department of the Central 

Rule 26 Responsibility of Controlling Officer in Government which relate to a 
respect of Budget allocation. The matter concerning the 
duties and responsibilities of a controlling Department proper and on the 
officer in respect of funds placed at his basis of which payment is to be 
disposal are to ensure: made or authorized by the 
(i) that the expenditure does not Accounts Officer, should be 

exceed the budget allocation. addressed to him. 
(ii) that the expenditure is incurred (ii) All other sanctions should be 

for the purpose for which funds accorded in the form of an Order, 
have been provided. which need not be addressed to 

(iii) that the expenditure is incurred in any authority, but a copy thereof 
public interest. should be endorsed to the 

(iv) that adequate control mechanism Accounts Officer concerned. 
is functioning in his Department (iii) In the case of non-recurring 
for prevention, detection of errors expenditure, the sanctioning 
and irregularities in the financial authority may, where required, 
proceedings of his subordinate accord sanction by signing or 
offices and to guard against countersigning the bill or 
waste and loss of public money, voucher, whether before or after 

Rule 27 (1) Date of effect of sanction. Subject to the money is drawn, instead of by 
fulfillment of the provisions as contained a separate sanction.1 
in the Delegation of Financial Powers (iv) All financial sanctions and orders 
Rules, all rules, sanctions or orders shall issued by a Department of the 
come into force from the date of issue Central Government with the 
unless any other date from which they concurrence of the Internal 
shall come into force is specified therein. Finance Wing or Finance 

Rule 27 (2) Date of creation to be indicated in Ministry, as applicable, should be 
sanctions for temporary posts. Orders communicated to the Accounts 
sanctioning the creation of a temporary Officer in accordance with the 
post should, in addition to the sanctioned procedure laid down in the 
duration, invariably specify the date from Delegation of Financial Powers 
which it is to be created Rules, and orders issued 

Rule 28 Powers in regard to certain special thereunder from time to time. 
matters. Except in pursuance of the (v) All financial sanctions and orders 
general delegation made by, or with the issued by a Department with the 
approval of the President, a subordinate concurrence of the Ministry of 
authority shall not, without the previous Home Affairs or Comptroller and 
consent of the Finance Ministry, issue an Auditor General of India or 
order which- Department of Personnel should 
(i) involves any grant of land, or specify that the sanction or 

assignment of revenue, or orders are issued with the 
concession, grant, lease or concurrence of that Department 
licence of mineral or forest rights, along with the number and date 
or rights to water, power or any of relevant communication of that 

 
1 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of  
Finance (MoF) OM No. 14(37)/2015-E.II.A dated 12.07.2024. 

 6 



Department wherein the should be endorsed to the Audit 
concurrence was conveyed. Officers:- 

(vi) All orders conveying sanctions to (a) Sanctions relating to grant to 
expenditure of a definite amount advances to Central 
or upto a specific limit should Government employees. 
express both in words and (b) Sanctions relating to 
figures the amount of appointment or promotion or 
expenditure sanctioned. transfer of Gazetted and 

(vii) Sanctions accorded by a Head of non- Gazetted Officers. 
Department may be (c) All sanctions relating to 
communicated to the Accounts creation or continuation or 
Officer by an authorized abolition of posts. 
Gazetted Officer of his Office (d) Sanctions for handing over 
duly signed by him for the Head charge and taking over 
of Department or conveyed in the charge, etc. 
name of the Head of the (e) Sanctions relating to 
Department. payment or withdrawal of 

(viii) All orders conveying sanctions to General Provident Fund 
the grant of additions to pay such advances to Government 
as Special Allowance, Personal servants. 
Pay, etc., should contain a brief (f) Sanctions of contingent 
summary of the reasons for the expenditure incurred under 
grant of such additions to pay so the powers of Head of 
as to enable the Accounts Officer Offices. 
to see that it is correctly termed (g) Other sanctions of routine 
as Special Allowance, Personal nature issued by Heads of 
Pay, etc., as the case may be. Subordinate Officers (other 

(ix) Orders issued by a Department than those issued by 
of a Union Territory Government Ministries or Departments 
where Audit and Accounts (a) proper and under powers of 
have not been separated shall be a Head of Department). 
communicated direct to the Audit (xii) Sanctions accorded by 
authority; (b) have been competent authority to grants of 
separated, copies shall be land and alienation of land 
endorsed to the Audit authorities. revenue, other than those in 
In case of sanctions in respect of which assignments of land 
matters, where reference was revenue are treated as cash 
made to the Central Government payment, shall be communicated 
under the Rules of Business to the Audit and/ or the Accounts 
framed under Section 46 of the Officer, as the case may be, in a 
Government of Union Territory consolidated monthly return 
Act, 1963, the following clause giving the necessary details. 
shall be added in the sanction Rule 30 Lapse of Sanctions. A sanction for any 
endorsed to Audit:- fresh charge shall, unless it is specifically 
“A reference had been made in renewed, lapse if no payment in whole or 
this case to the Central in part has been made during a period of 
Government and the above twelve months from the date of issue of 
order/letter conforms to the such sanction. Provided that - 
decision of the Central (i) when the period of currency of 
Government vide Government of the sanction is prescribed in the 
India, Ministry/Department of departmental regulations or is 
Letter No…………dated… ”. specified in the sanction itself, it 

(x) Copies of all General Financial shall lapse on the expiry of such 
Orders issued by a Department periods; or 
of the Central Government with (ii) when there is a specific provision 
the concurrence of the in a sanction that the expenditure 
Comptroller and Auditor General would be met from the Budget 
of India shall be supplied to the provision of a specified financial 
Comptroller and Auditor General year, it shall lapse at the close of 
of India. that financial year; or 

(xi) Copies of all sanctions or orders (iii) in the case of purchase of stores, 
other than the following types a sanction shall not lapse, if 

 7 



tenders have been accepted (in (c) refunds allowed on the 
the case of local or direct ground that the claims were 
purchase of stores) or the indent time-barred: 
has been placed (in the case of (ii) Petty losses of value not 
Central Purchases) on the exceeding Rupees ten thousand. 
Central Purchase Organization Rule 33  (2) Cases involving serious irregularities 
within the period of one year of shall be brought to the notice of Financial 
the date of issue of that sanction, Adviser or Chief Accounting Authority of 
even if the actual payment in the Ministry or Department concerned 
whole or in part has not been and the Controller General of Accounts, 
made during the said period. Ministry of Finance. 

Rule 31 Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 33 (3) Report of loss contemplated in sub-
Rule 30, a sanction in respect of an rule (1) & (2) shall be made at two 
addition to a permanent establishment, stages:- 
made from year to year under a general (i) An initial report should be made 
scheme by a competent authority, or in as soon as a suspicion arises 
respect of an allowance sanctioned for a that a loss has taken place. 
post or for a class of Government (ii) The final report should be sent to 
servants, but not drawn by the officer(s) authorities indicated in sub rule 
concerned, shall not lapse. (1) & (2) after investigation 

Rule32 Remission of disallowances by Audit indicating nature and extent of 
and writing off of overpayment made loss, errors or neglect of rules by 
to Government servants. The remission which the loss has been caused 
of disallowances by Audit and writing off and the prospects of recovery. 
of overpayments made to Government Rule 33 (4) The complete report contemplated in 
servants by competent authorities shall sub- rule 3, shall reach through proper 
be in accordance with the provisions of channels to the Head of the Department, 
the Delegation of Financial Powers who shall finally dispose of the same 
Rules, and instructions issued under the powers delegated to him under 
thereunder. the Delegation of Financial Power Rules. 

 The reports, which he cannot finally 
II. DEFALCATION AND LOSSES dispose of under the delegated powers, 
 shall be submitted to the Finance 
Rule 33 (1) Report of Losses. Any loss or Ministry. 

shortage of public moneys, departmental Rule 33  (5) An amount lost through 
revenue or receipts, stamps, opium, misappropriation, defalcation, 
stores or other property held by, or on embezzlement, etc., may be redrawn on 
behalf of, Government irrespective of the a simple receipt pending investigation, 
cause of loss and manner of detection, recovery or write-off with the approval of 
shall be immediately reported by the the authority competent to write-off the 
subordinate authority concerned to the loss in question. 
next higher authority as well as to the Rule 33  (6) In cases of loss to Government on 
Statutory Audit Officer and to the account of culpability of Government 
concerned Principal Accounts Officer, servants, the loss should be borne by the 
even when such loss has been made Central Government Department or State 
good by the party responsible for it. Government concerned with the 
However, the following losses need not transaction. Similarly, if any recoveries 
be reported: are made from the erring Government 
(i) Cases involving losses of officials in cash, the receipt will be 

revenue due to credited to the Central Government 
(a) mistakes in assessments Department or the State Government 

which are discovered too who sustained the loss. 
late to permit a Rule 33  (7) All cases involving loss of 
supplementary claim being Government money arising from 
made, erroneous or irregular issue of cheques 

(b) under assessments which or irregular accounting of receipts will be 
are due to interpretation of reported to the Controller General of 
the law by the local authority Accounts along with the circumstances 
being overruled by higher leading to the loss, so that he can take 
authority after the expiry of steps to remedy defects in rules or 
the time-limit prescribed procedures, if any, connected therewith. 
under the law, and  

 8 



Rule 34 Loss of Government Property due to should be completed promptly with 
fire, theft, fraud. Departmental Officers special attention to action against 
shall, in addition to taking action as delinquents and remedial measures, 
prescribed in Rule 33, follow the taken to strengthen the control system 
provisions indicated below in cases  
involving material loss or destruction of III. SUBMISSION OF RECORDS AND 
Government property as a result of fire, INFORMATION 
theft, fraud, etc.  
All losses above the value of Rupees Fifty Rule 39 Demand for information by Audit or 
thousand due to suspected fire, theft, Accounts Officer. A subordinate 
fraud, etc., shall be invariably reported to authority shall afford all reasonable 
the Police for investigation as early as facilities to the Audit Officer and Pay and 
possible. Accounts Officer for the discharge of his 
Once the matter is reported to the Police functions, and furnish fullest possible 
Authorities, all concerned should assist information required by him for the 
the Police in their investigation. A formal preparation of any official account or 
investigation report should be obtained report, payments and internal audit. 
from the Police Authorities in all cases, Rule 40 A subordinate authority shall not withhold 
which are referred to them. any information, books or other 

Rule 35 Loss of immovable property by fire, documents required by the Audit Officer 
flood etc. All loss of immovable property or Accounts Officer. 
exceeding Rupees fifty thousand, such Rule 41 If the contents of any file are categorized 
as buildings, communications, or other as ‘Secret’ or ‘Top Secret’ the file maybe 
works, caused by fire, flood, cyclone, sent personally to the Head of the Audit 
earthquake or any other natural cause, Office specifying this fact, who will then 
shall be reported at once by the deal with it in accordance with the 
subordinate authority concerned to standing instructions for handling and 
Government through the usual channel. custody of such classified documents.
All other losses should be immediately 
brought to the notice of the next higher 
authority. 

Rule 36 Report to Audit and Accounts 
Officers. After a full enquiry as to the 
cause and the extent of the loss has been 
made, the detailed report should be sent 
by the subordinate authority concerned to 
Government through the proper channel; 
a copy of the report or an abstract thereof 
being simultaneously forwarded to the 
Audit officer and Pay and Accounts 
Officer. 

Rule 37  Responsibility of losses. An officer 
shall be held personally responsible for 
any loss sustained by the Government 
through fraud or negligence on his part. 
He will also be held personally 
responsible for any loss arising from 
fraud or negligence of any other officer to 
the extent to which it may be shown that 
he contributed to the loss by his own 
action or negligence. 
The Departmental proceedings for 
assessment of responsibility for the loss 
shall be conducted according to the 
instructions contained in Appendix 1 and 
those issued by the Ministry of Personnel 
from time to time. 

Rule 38 Prompt disposal of cases of loss. 
Action at each stage of detection, 
reporting, write off, final disposal, in 
cases of losses including action against 
delinquents and remedial measures 

 9 



Ch.-3 - BUDGET FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION 
  

Rule 42 Financial Year. Financial year of the item wise break-up of all major items of 
Government shall commence on the 1st tax and non-tax revenues are clearly 
day of April of each year and end on the identified and depicted in the receipt 
31st day of March of the following year. estimates. This is required to highlight all 

Rule 43 (1) Presentation of Budget to individual items of significance. Any 
Parliament. major variation in estimates with 
In accordance with the provisions of reference to past actuals or/and Budget 
Article112 (1) of the Constitution, the Estimates shall be supported by cogent 
Finance Minister shall arrange to lay reasons. The accounting heads under 
before both the Houses of Parliament, an which major tax and non-tax revenues 
Annual Financial Statement also known are collected shall be prescribed by the 
as the ‘Budget’ showing the estimated administrative Ministry in consultation 
receipts and expenditure of the Central with the Budget Division in the Finance 
Government in respect of a financial year, Ministry. 
before the commencement of that year. Rule46 Non-Tax Revenues. While the tax 

Rule43 (2) The receipts and expenditure of the revenues, non- debt capital receipts 
Railways being a departmental including disinvestments and borrowings 
commercial organization form part of the are managed by the various Departments 
Government’s receipts and expenditure of the Ministry of Finance, the non-tax 
and are included in the Annual Financial revenues are collected through all 
Statement. With the merger of Railway Ministries/Departments and other 
Budget with the General Budget, the autonomous bodies and implementing 
Demands for Grants and the Statement agencies and comprise an important 
of Budget Estimates of Railways shall source of revenue for the Government. 
also be part of the General Budget with Rule 47 User Charges. ‘User Charges’ is an 
effect from 2017-18. important component of the non-tax 

Rule 43 (3) The provisions for preparation, revenues. Each Ministry/Department may 
formulation and submission of budget to undertake an exercise to identify the ‘user 
the Parliament are contained in Articles charges’ levied by it and publish the same 
112 to 116 of the Constitution of India. on its website. 

Rule43 (4) The Ministry of Finance, Budget (i) While fixing the rates of user 
Division, shall issue guidelines for charges, the 
preparation of budget estimates from Ministries/Departments must 
time to time. All the ensure that the user charges 
Ministries/Departments shall comply in recover the current cost of 
full with these guidelines. providing services with 

Rule44 The budget shall contain the following: - reasonable return on capital 
(i) Estimates of all revenues investment. 

expected to be raised during the (ii) Any deviation from these 
financial year to which the budget principles shall be specifically 
relates; recorded with reasons justifying 

(ii) Estimates of all expenditure for the setting of user charges lower 
each programme, scheme and than the cost recovery norms, if 
project in that financial year; any. 

(iii) Estimates of all interest and debt (iii) The rates of user charges should 
servicing charges and any be linked with appropriate price 
repayments on loans in that indices and reviewed at least 
financial year; every three years. 

(iv) Any other information as may be (iv) In order to enable ease of 
prescribed. revision of user charges, the rate 

Rule 45 Receipt Estimates. The detailed of user charges shall be fixed, 
estimates of receipts shall be prepared by wherever possible through Rules 
the estimating authorities separately for or executive orders and not 
each Major Head of Account in the through a statute. 
prescribed form. For each Major Head, Rule 48 Dividends and Profits. Dividends and 
the estimating authority shall give the profits including the transfer of surplus 
break-up of the Minor/Subhead/ Detailed from Reserve Bank of India is a major 
wise estimate along with actuals of the component of the non-tax revenues. The 
past three years. While doing the head payment of dividends/profits etc. by the 
wise classification, it may be ensured that  Central Public Sector Enterprises shall 

 10 



not be delayed and must be paid within Demand for Grants. 
an appropriate time frame immediately Rule 51 (2) Generally, one Demand for Grant is 
after the decision on dividend is taken in presented in respect of each Ministry or 
the AGM. Ministries or Departments shall Department. However, in respect of large 
monitor timely payments of dividends and Ministries or Departments, more than one 
profits. The dividend shall be payable as Demand may be presented. Each 
per the guidelines issued by DIPAM in Demand normally includes provisions 
this regard. required for a service, i.e. provisions on 

Rule 49 Receipts Portal. The Government has account of revenue expenditure, capital 
provided a public portal for online expenditure, grants to the State and 
collection of various non-tax revenues Union Territory Governments and also 
including various fees and user charges Loans and Advances relating to the 
through e- Receipts. All service. 
Ministries/Departments, shall take Rule 51 (3) The Demand for Grants shall be 
prompt measures for migration to e- presented to Parliament at two levels. 
Receipts, to ensure customer The main Demand for Grants shall be 
convenience and immediate credit of presented to Parliament by the Ministry of 
receipts to the Government account. Finance, Budget Division along with the 

Rule 50 (1) Expenditure estimates. The Annual Financial Statement while the 
expenditure estimates shall show Detailed Demands for Grants, for 
separately the sums required to meet the consideration by the “Departmentally 
expenditure Charged on the Related Standing Committee” (DRSC) of 
Consolidated Fund under Article 112 (3) the Parliament, are laid on the Table of 
of the Constitution and sums required to the Lok Sabha by the concerned 
meet other expenditure for which a vote Ministries/ Departments, as per dates 
of the Lok Sabha is required under Article approved from time to time. 
113(2) of the Constitution. Rule 52 (1) Form of Annual Financial 

Rule 50 (2) The estimates shall also distinguish Statement and Demands for Grant. 
provisions for expenditure on revenue The form of the Annual Financial 
account from capital account, including Statement and Demands for Grants shall 
on loans by the Government and for be laid down by the Finance Ministry and 
repayment of loans, treasury bills, cash no alteration of arrangement or 
management bills and ways and means classification shall be made without the 
advances. approval of that Ministry. 

Rule 50 (3) The detailed estimates of expenditure Rule 52 (2) The heads under which provision for 
shall be prepared by the estimating expenditure shall be made in the 
authorities up to the final unit of Demands for Grants or Appropriation 
appropriation (Object head) under the shall be prescribed by the Finance 
prescribed Major and Minor Heads of Ministry in consultation with the 
Accounts for both Revenue and Capital Administrative Ministry or Department. 
expenditure. Estimates shall include The authorized heads for expenditure in 
suitable provision for liabilities of the a year shall be as shown in the Detailed 
previous years that is to be discharged Demands for Grants passed by 
during the year. Parliament and no change shall be made 

Rule50 (4) The estimates of scheme related and therein without the formal approval of the 
other expenditures shall be processed in Finance Ministry. 
consultation with the Budget Division, Rule 52 (3) The major head wise provisions in the 
Ministry of Finance in accordance with Detailed Demands for Grants shall match 
the instructions issued by it. with the provision made in the Demands 

Rule 50 (5) The Revised and Budget Estimates of for Grants presented by Budget Division, 
both Revenue and Capital expenditure as the appropriations are sought on the 
after being scrutinized by the Financial basis of Demands for Grants. 
Advisers and approved by the Secretary NOTE: Detailed instructions for 
of the Administrative Ministry or preparation of the budget are available in 
Department concerned shall be Appendix 2, 3 and 4. 
forwarded to the Budget Division in the Rule 53 (1) Acceptance and inclusion of 
Ministry of Finance in such manner and estimates. The estimates of receipts and 
forms as may be prescribed by it from expenditure of each Ministry/Department 
time to time. shall be scrutinized in the Budget Division 

Rule 51 (1) Demands for Grants. The estimates of the Ministry of Finance. Secretary 
for expenditure for which vote of Lok (Expenditure) may hold meetings with 
Sabha is required shall be in the form of Secretaries or Financial Advisers of 

 11 



Administrative Ministries or Departments Departments which, in turn, shall 
to discuss the totality of the requirements distribute the same to their subordinate 
of funds for various programmes and formations. The distribution so made 
schemes, along with receipts of the shall also be communicated to the 
Ministries or Departments. respective Pay and Accounts Officers 

Rule 53 (2) The estimates initially submitted by who shall exercise check against the 
the Departments may undergo some allocation to each subordinate authority. 
changes as a result of scrutiny in the  
Budget Division, Ministry of Finance and II. CONTROL OF EXPENDITURE 
deliberations in the pre-budget meetings AGAINST BUDGET 
between the Secretary (Expenditure) and  
the Secretary or Financial Adviser of the Rule 57 (1) Responsibility for control of 
Department concerned. The final Expenditure. The Departments of the 
estimates arrived at on the basis of Central Government shall be responsible 
scrutiny and pre-budget meetings shall for the control of expenditure against the 
be incorporated in the Budget sanctioned grants and appropriations 
documents. placed at their disposal. The control shall 

Rule 54 Outcome Budget. After finalization of be exercised through the Heads of 
the estimates for budgetary allocations, Departments and other Controlling 
the Department of Expenditure in Officers, if any, and Disbursing Officers 
consultation with NITI Aayog and the subordinate to them. 
concerned Ministries shall prepare an Rule 57  (2) A Grant or Appropriation can be 
Outcome Budget statement linking utilised only to cover the charges 
outlays against each scheme/project with (including liabilities, if any, of the past 
the outputs/deliverables and medium- year) which are to be paid during the 
term outcomes. The outputs/deliverables financial year of the Grant or 
shall be mandatorily given in Appropriation and adjusted in the account 
measurable/quantitative terms on the of the year. No charges against a Grant 
basis of parameters and deliverables or Appropriation can be authorized after 
decided in advance, on the basis of the expiry of the financial year. 
projections made in the Medium-Term Rule 57 (3) No expenditure shall be incurred 
Expenditure Framework (MTEF) which may have the effect of exceeding 
Statement. Allocations for each the total grant or appropriation authorized 
scheme/project shall be against a firm set by Parliament by law for a financial year, 
of deliverables which shall be adhered to. except after obtaining a supplementary 
The performance against specified grant or appropriation or an advance from 
outcomes would form the basis of the Contingency Fund. Since voted and 
deciding on the continuation of the charged portions as also the revenue and 
scheme and the quantum of budget capital sections of a Grant/Appropriation 
allocation. are distinct and re-appropriation inter se 

Rule 55 Vote on Account. If the Appropriation is not permissible, an excess in any one 
Bill seeking authorization of the portion or section is treated as an excess 
Parliament to make expenditure in in the Grant/Appropriation. 
consonance with the Budget proposal is Rule57(4) To have effective control over expenditure 
likely to be passed after the start of the by the Departments, Controlling and 
financial year to which it corresponds Disbursing Officers subordinate to them 
then pending the completion of the shall follow the procedure as given 
procedure prescribed in Article 113 of the below:- 
Constitution for the passing of the (i) For drawl of money the Drawing 
Budget, the Finance Ministry may need to and Disbursing Officer shall (a) 
obtain a ‘Vote on Account’ to cover Prepare and present bills for 
expenditure for a brief period in “charged” and “voted” 
accordance with the provisions of Article expenditure separately. (b) Enter 
116 of the Constitution. Funds made on each bill the complete 
available under Vote on Account are not accounts classifications from 
to be utilized for expenditure on a ‘New major head down to the object 
Service’. head of account. When a single 

Rule 56 Communication and distribution of bill includes charges falling under 
grants and appropriations. After the two or more object heads, the 
Appropriation Bill relating to Budget is charges shall be distributed 
passed, the Ministry of Finance shall accurately over the respective 
communicate the same to the Ministries / heads. (c) Enter on each bill the 

 12 



progressive total of expenditure GFR 7, in which he shall 
up-to-date under the primary unit incorporate – 
of appropriation to which the bill (a) the totals of the figures 
relates, including the amount of supplied by Disbursing 
the bill on which the entry is Officers; 
made. (b) the totals taken from his own 

(ii) All drawing and disbursing registers in Form GFR 5; 
officers shall maintain separate (c) the totals of such 
registers in Form GFR 5, adjustments under the 
physically or electronically for various detailed heads as 
allocation under each minor or communicated to him by the 
sub-head of account with which Accounts Officer on account 
they are concerned. of transfer entries and 

(iii) On the third day of each month, a expenditure debited to the 
copy of the entries made in this grant as a result of 
register during the preceding settlement of inward 
month shall be sent by the officer account claims and not 
maintaining it, to the Head of the reckoned by his DDOs. 
Department or other designated (vii) If any adjustment communicated 
Controlling Officer. This by the Accounts Officer affects 
statement shall also include the appropriation at the disposal 
adjustment of an inward claim, of a subordinate Disbursing 
etc., communicated by Pay and Officer, the fact that the 
Accounts Officer directly to the adjustment has been made shall 
DDO (and not to his Grant be communicated by the 
Controlling Officer). If there are Controlling Officer to the 
no entries in the register in any Disbursing Officer concerned. 
month, a ‘nil’ statement shall be (viii) On receipt of all the necessary 
sent. returns, the Head of the 

(iv) The Controlling Officer will Department shall prepare a 
maintain a broadsheet in Form consolidated account in Form 
GFR 6 to monitor the receipt of GFR 8, showing the complete 
the return prescribed in the expenditure from the grant or 
foregoing sub- clause appropriation at his disposal upto 

(v) On receipt of the returns from the end of the preceding month. 
Disbursing Officers, the Rule 57 (5) The Head of the Department and the 
Controlling Officer shall examine Accounts Officer shall be jointly 
them and satisfy himself: responsible for the monthly reconciliation 
(a) that the accounts of the figures given in the accounts 

classification has been maintained by the Head of the 
properly given; Department with those appearing in the 

(b) that progressive Accounts Officer’s books. The procedure 
expenditure has been for reconciliation shall be as follows: - 
properly noted and the (i) DDOs shall maintain a Bill 
available balances worked Register in Form TR 28-A, and 
out correctly; note all bills presented for 

(c) that expenditure up-to-date payment to the PAO in the 
is within the grant or register. As soon as cheques for 
appropriation; and the bills presented for payment 

(d) that the returns have been are received, and/or status of e-
signed by Disbursing payments are verified from the 
Officers. Where the reports available with DDO on 
Controlling Officer finds PFMS portal these shall be noted 
defects in any of these in the appropriate column of the 
respects, he shall take steps Bill Register and the DDOs shall 
to rectify the defect. ensure that the amounts of 

(vi) When all the returns from the cheques tally with the net amount 
Disbursing Officers for a of the bills presented. In case any 
particular month have been retrenchment is made by the 
received and found to be in order, PAO, a note of such 
the Controlling Officer shall retrenchments shall be kept 
compile a statement in Form against the bill in the remarks 

 13 



column in TR 28-A. Principal Accounts Officer 
(ii) The PAOs shall furnish to each of certifying the correctness of the 

the DDOs including Cheque – figures for the quarter by the 15th 
drawing DDOs, an extract from of the second following month 
the expenditure control register after the end of quarters April-
or from the Compilation Sheet June, July-September, October-
every month indicating the December and January- March. 
expenditure relating to grants Rule 57 (6) The Departments of the Central 
controlled by him classified under Government shall obtain from their 
the various major-minor detailed Heads of Departments and other offices 
head of accounts. The under them the departmental figures of 
statements for May to March expenditure in Form GFR 8 by the 15th of 
shall also contain Progressive the month following the month to which 
Figures. the returns relate. The figures relating to 

(iii) On receipt of these extracts from Revenue and Capital expenditure shall 
the PAOs, the DDOs shall tally be separately shown in these returns. 
the figures received, excluding The information so obtained shall be 
book adjustments, with the posted in register(s) kept for watching the 
expenditure worked out for the flow of expenditure against the 
month in the GFR 5 register. sanctioned grant or appropriation. 
Discrepancies, if any, between Progressive totals of expenditure shall be 
the two sets of figures shall be worked out for the purpose. If the 
promptly investigated by the departmental figures obtained in Form 
DDO in consultation with the GFR 8 and posted in the register(s), 
PAO. He shall also note in the require correction in a subsequent month, 
GFR 5 register particulars of Heads of Departments or other offices 
book adjustments advised by the shall make such corrections by making 
PAO through the monthly plus or minus entries in the progressive 
statement. Thereafter, the DDO totals. In case the Accounts Office figures 
shall furnish to the PAO a which subsequently become available 
certificate of agreement of the are found to be higher than departmental 
figures as per his books with figures, the former shall be assumed to 
those indicated by the PAOs by be the correct figures, as appropriation 
the last day of the month accounts are prepared on the basis of the 
following the month of accounts. figures booked in the accounts. 

(iv) The Principal Accounts Officer Rule 57 (7) The Departments of Central 
(or PAO wherever payments, Government shall also obtain from the 
relating to a grant are handled Heads of Departments and other 
wholly by a PAO) of each authorities under them, statements 
Ministry, shall send a monthly showing the details of the physical 
statement showing the progress of the schemes for which they 
expenditure vis-à-vis the Budget are responsible. This statement shall 
provision under the various show the name of the scheme, the 
heads of accounts, in the Budget provision for each scheme, the 
prescribed pro forma, to the progressive expenditure on each 
Heads of Departments scheme, the progress of the scheme in 
responsible for overall control of physical terms and the detailed reasons 
expenditure against grant of the for any shortfalls or excess, both against 
Ministry as a whole. The figures physical and financial targets. 
so communicated by the Rule 57 (8) A Broadsheet in Form GFR 9 shall be 
Principal Accounts Officer (or the maintained by the Departments of 
PAO concerned) shall be Central Government or each Head of 
compared by the Heads of Department and other authorities directly 
Departments with those under them, to watch the prompt receipt 
consolidated in Form GFR 8 and of the various returns mentioned above 
differences, if any, shall be taken from month to month and to take 
up by the Heads of Departments necessary measures for rectifying any 
with the Principal Accounts defaults noticed. 
Officers (or the PAO concerned) Rule 58 Maintenance of Liability Register for 
for reconciliation. The Head of effecting proper control over 
the Department shall furnish a expenditure. In order to maintain proper 
quarterly certificate to the control over expenditure, a Controlling 

 14 



Officer shall obtain from the spending financial year. 
authorities liability statements in Form Rule 62 (2) The savings as well as provisions that 
GFR 3- A every month, starting from the cannot be profitably utilised shall be 
month of October in each financial year. surrendered to Government immediately, 
The Controlling Officer shall also they are foreseen without waiting till the 
maintain a Liability Register in Form GFR end of the year. No savings shall be held 
3. in reserve for possible future excesses. 

Rule 59 Personal attention of the Head of Rule 62 (3) Rush of expenditure, particularly in 
Department /Controlling Officer the closing months of the Financial Year, 
required to estimate savings or shall be regarded as a breach of financial 
excesses. A Head of Department or propriety and shall be avoided. The 
Controlling Officer shall be in a position to Financial Advisers of the 
estimate the likelihood of savings or Ministries/Departments shall ensure 
excesses every month and to regularize adherence to the stipulated Monthly 
them in accordance with the instructions Expenditure Plan and the guidelines 
laid down in Rule 62. issued in this regard by the Budget 

Rule 60 Control of expenditure against Division, Department of Economic 
grant/appropriation and ultimate Affairs, from time to time. 
responsibility of the authority Rule 62 (4) The Financial Advisers of the 
administering it. The Accounts Officer Ministries/ Departments shall ensure 
shall report to the Head of the adherence to the stipulated Quarterly 
Department concerned immediately on Expenditure Plan and the guidelines 
the first appearance of any issued in this regard by Ministry of 
disproportionate expenditure, particularly Finance from time to time. 
in respect of recurring items of Rule 63 Expenditure on New Service. No 
expenditure under any grant or expenditure shall be incurred during a 
appropriation or a primary unit of financial year on a “New Service” not 
appropriation thereof. However, the contemplated in the Annual Budget for 
authority administering a grant/ the year except after obtaining a 
appropriation is ultimately responsible for supplementary grant or appropriation or 
the control of expenditure against the an advance from the Contingency Fund 
grant/appropriation and not the Accounts during that year. The guidelines to 
Officer. determine cases of “New Service”/ “New 

Rule 61 Excess Expenditure. Instrument of Service” are contained in 
1. The Accounts Officer shall not Annexure-1 to Appendix -3. 

allow any payment against Rule 64 (1) Additional Allotment for excess 
sanctions in excess of the Budget expenditure. A subordinate authority 
provisions unless there is specific incurring the expenditure shall be 
approval of the Chief Accounting responsible for seeing that the allotment 
Authority. placed at its disposal is not exceeded. 

2. The Financial Advisers and Chief Where any excess over the allotment is 
Accounting Authority, before apprehended, the subordinate authority 
according concurrence for shall obtain additional allotment before 
excess under any Head, shall incurring the excess expenditure. For this 
ensure availability of funds purpose, the authorities incurring 
through Re-appropriation/   expenditure shall maintain a ‘Liability 
Supplementary Demands for Register’ in Form GFR 3. 
Grants. (Refer Appendix 10) Rule 64 (2) A Disbursing Officer may not, on his 

Rule 62 (1) Surrender of savings. Departments own authority, authorize any payment in 
of the Central Government shall excess of the funds placed at his 
surrender to the Finance Ministry, by the disposal. If the Disbursing Officer is 
dates prescribed by that Ministry before called upon to honour a claim, which is 
the close of the financial year, all the certain to produce an excess over the 
anticipated savings noticed in the Grants allotment or appropriation at his disposal, 
or Appropriations controlled by them. The he shall take the orders of the 
Finance Ministry shall communicate the administrative authority to which he is 
acceptance of such surrenders as are subordinate before authorizing payment 
accepted by it to the Accounts Officer, of the claim in question. The 
before the close of the year. The funds administrative authority shall then 
provided during the financial year and not arrange to provide funds either by re-
utilized before the close of that financial appropriation or by obtaining a 
year shall stand lapsed at the close of the Supplementary Grant or Appropriation or 

 15 



an advance from the Contingency Fund. sufficient time for the voting of the 
Instructions contained in Note below Supplementary Demand and the passing 
Appendix 10 may also be kept in view. of the connected appropriation bill before 

Rule 65 (1) Re-appropriation of Funds. Subject close of the financial year, an advance 
to the provisions of Rule 10 of the from the Contingency Fund set up under 
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, Article 267(1) of the Constitution shall be 
and also subject to such other general or obtained before incurring the 
specific restrictions as may be imposed expenditure. 
by the Finance Ministry in this behalf, re- Rule 67 (2) An advance from the Contingency 
appropriation of funds from one primary Fund shall also be obtained to meet 
unit of appropriation to another such unit expenditure in excess of the provisions 
within a grant or appropriation, may be for the service included in an 
sanctioned by a competent authority at Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act. 
any time before the close of the financial Rule 67 (3) The application for an advance from 
year to which such grant or appropriation the Contingency Fund shall indicate inter 
relates. The Primary unit in this regard alia the particulars of the additional 
shall be the final unit of appropriation i.e. expenditure involved and the sanction to 
the Object head of account. the advance has also to indicate the sub-

Rule 65 (2) Re-appropriation of funds shall be head and the primary unit of the Grant to 
made only when it is known or anticipated which the expenditure appropriately 
that the appropriation for the unit from relates. In case, however, any difficulty is 
which funds are to be transferred shall felt, the matter shall be referred to the 
not be utilized in full or that savings can Finance Ministry for clarification. 
be effected in the appropriation for the Rule 67 (4) The procedure for obtaining an 
said unit. advance from the Contingency Fund and 

Rule 65 (3) Funds shall not be re-appropriated recoupment of the Fund shall be as laid 
from a unit with the intention of restoring down in the Contingency Fund of India 
the diverted appropriation to that unit (Amendment) Rules, 2021 as amended 
when savings become available under from time to time. For ready reference, 
other units later in the year. rules have been placed at Appendix - 6 to 

Rule 65 (4) An application for re-appropriation of this volume. 
funds shall ordinarily be supported by a [Note: The Contingency Fund of India 
statement in Form GFR 1 or any other (Amendment) Rules, 2021 were 
special form authorized by departmental published in Extraordinary Gazette of 
regulations showing how the excess is India vide No. G.S.R. 721(E) dated 4th 
proposed to be met. In all orders, October, 2021.]2 
sanctioning re-appropriation, the reasons Rule 68 Inevitable Payments. 
for saving and excess of Rupees 1 lakh (i) Subject to the provisions of 
or over and the primary units (secondary Article 114(3) of the Constitution, 
units, wherever necessary), affected shall money indisputably payable by 
be invariably stated. The authority Government shall not ordinarily 
sanctioning the re-appropriation shall be left unpaid. 
endorse a copy of the order to the (ii) Suitable provision for anticipated 
Accounts Officer. liabilities shall invariably be made 

Rule 66 Supplementary Grants. If savings are in Demands for Grants to be 
not available within the Grant to which the placed before Parliament. 
payment is required to be debited, or if Rule 69 For easy reference an extract relating to 
the expenditure is on “New Service” or procedures followed in the Accounts 
“New Instrument of Service” not provided Office for check against provision of 
in the budget, necessary Supplementary funds as a part of pre-check of bills has 
Grant or Appropriation in accordance with been placed at Appendix 10. 
Article 115(1) of the Constitution shall be Rule 70 Duties and Responsibilities of the 
obtained before payment is authorized Chief Accounting Authority. The 
(Refer to Appendix 5). Secretary of a Ministry/Department who 

Rule 67 (1) Advance from Contingency Fund. is the Chief Accounting Authority of the 
When a need arises to incur unforeseen Ministry/ Department shall: — 
expenditure in excess of the sanctioned (i) be responsible and accountable 
grant or appropriation or on a new service for financial management of his 
not provided in Budget and there is not Ministry or Department. 

 
2Inserted vide DoE’s OM No.8(18)/2021/E.II.A dated 06.05.2022 in  
view of DEA OM F.No.4(13)-B(SD)/2021 dated 18.04.2022 

 16 



(ii) ensure that the public funds 
appropriated to the Ministry or 
Department are used for the 
purpose for which they were 
meant. 

(iii) be responsible for the effective, 
efficient, economical and 
transparent use of the resources 
of the Ministry or Department in 
achieving the stated project 
objectives of that Ministry or 
Department, whilst complying 
with performance standards. 

(iv) appear before the Committee on 
Public Accounts and any other 
Parliamentary Committee for 
examination. 

(v) review and monitor regularly the 
performance of the programmes 
and projects assigned to his 
Ministry to determine whether 
stated objectives are achieved. 

(vi) be responsible for preparation of 
expenditure and other 
statements relating to his Ministry 
or Department as required by 
regulations, guidelines or 
directives issued by Ministry of 
Finance. 

(vii) shall ensure that his Ministry or 
Department maintains full and 
proper records of financial 
transactions and adopts systems 
and procedures that shall at all 
times afford internal controls. 

(viii) shall ensure that his Ministry or 
Department follows the 
Government procurement 
procedure for execution of works, 
as well as for procurement of 
services and supplies, and 
implements it in a fair, equitable, 
transparent, competitive and 
cost- effective manner; 

(ix) shall take effective and 
appropriate steps to ensure his 
Ministry or Department: - 
(a) collects all moneys due to 

the Government and 
(b) avoids unauthorized, 

irregular and wasteful 
expenditure.

 17 



 

Ch.-4 - GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS 
 

Rule 71 Preparation and presentation of accounts shall represent the actual cash 
Accounts. Accounts of the Union receipts and disbursements during a 
Government shall be prepared every year financial year as distinguished from 
showing the receipts and disbursements amounts due to or by Government during 
for the year, surplus or deficit generated the same period. 
during the year and changes in Rule75 Period of Accounts. The annual 
Government liabilities and assets. The accounts of the Central Government shall 
accounts shall be prepared by Controller record transactions which take place 
General of Accounts, certified by the during a financial year running from the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 1st April to the 31st March thereof. 
and along with the report of the Rule 76 Currency in which Accounts are kept. 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India The accounts of Government shall be 
on these accounts, shall be submitted to maintained in Indian Rupees. All foreign 
the President of India, preferably within currency transactions and foreign aid 
six months of close of the Financial Year, shall be brought into account after 
who shall cause them to be laid before conversion into Indian Rupees. 
each House of Parliament. Rule 77 Main Divisions and structure of 

Rule 72 Form of Accounts. By virtue of the Accounts. The accounts of Government 
provisions of Article 150 of the shall be kept in three parts, Consolidated 
Constitution, the Accounts of the Union Fund (Part-I), Contingency Fund (Part-II) 
Government shall be kept in such form as and Public Account (Part-III). 
the President may, on the advice of the Part-I – Consolidated Fund is divided into 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India, two Divisions, namely, ‘Revenue’ and 
prescribe. ‘Capital’ divisions. The Revenue Division 
The Controller General of Accounts in the comprises the following sections: 
Ministry of Finance (Department of ‘Receipt Heads (Revenue Account)’ 
Expenditure) is responsible for dealing with the proceeds of taxation and 
prescribing the form of accounts of the other receipts classified as revenue and 
Union and States, and to frame, or revise, the section ‘Expenditure Heads 
rules and manuals relating thereto on (Revenue Account)’ dealing with the 
behalf of the President of India in terms of revenue expenditure met therefrom. The 
Article 150 of the Constitution of India, on Capital Division comprises three 
the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor sections, viz., ‘Receipt Heads (Capital 
General of India. Account)’, ‘Expenditure Heads (Capital 

Rule 73 Principles of Accounting. The main Account)’ and ‘Public Debt, Loans and 
principles according to which the Advances, etc.’. These sections are in 
accounts of the Government of India shall turn divided into sectors such as ‘General 
be maintained are contained in Services’, ‘Social and Community 
Government Accounting Rules, 1990; Services’, ‘Economic Services’, etc., 
Accounting Rules for Treasuries; and under which specific functions or services 
Account Code Volume-III. Detailed rules are grouped corresponding to the sectors 
and instructions relating to the forms of of classification and which are 
the initial and subsidiary accounts to be represented by Major Heads (comprising 
kept and rendered by officers of the Sub-Major Heads wherever necessary). 
Department of Posts and other technical In Part-II – Contingency Fund- are 
departments are laid down in the recorded transactions connected with the 
respective Accounts Manuals or in the Contingency Fund set up by the 
departmental regulations relating to the Government of India under Article 267 of 
Departments concerned. the Constitution or Section 48 of 

Rule74 Cash based Accounting. Government Government of Union Territories Act, 
accounts shall be prepared on cash 1963. There shall be a single Major Head 
basis. With the exception of such book to record the transactions thereunder, 
adjustments as may be authorised by which will be followed by Minor, Sub 
Government Accounting Rules, 1990 or and/or Detailed Heads. 
by any general or special order issued by In Part-III – Public Account- transactions 
the Central Government on the advice of relating to debt (other than those included 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of in Part-I), reserve funds, deposits, 
India, the transactions in Government advances, suspense, remittances and 

 18 



cash balances shall be recorded. Power Rules. The power to amend or 
Rule 78 Classification of transactions in modify these Object heads and to open 

Government Accounts. As a general new Object Heads rest with Department 
rule, classification of transactions in of Expenditure of Ministry of Finance on 
Government Accounts, shall have closer the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor 
reference to functions, programmes and General of India. 
activities of the Government and the Rule 80 Conformity of budget heads with rules 
object of revenue or expenditure, rather of classification. Budget Heads 
than the department in which the revenue exhibited in estimates of receipts and 
or expenditure occurs. expenditure framed by the Government 
Major Heads (comprising Sub-Major or in any appropriation order shall 
Heads wherever necessary) are divided conform to the prescribed rules of 
into Minor Heads. Minor Heads may have classification. 
a number of subordinate heads, generally Rule 81 Responsibility of Departmental 
known as Sub Heads. The Sub Heads officers. Every officer responsible for the 
are further divided into Detailed Heads collection of Government dues or 
followed by Object Heads. expenditure of Government money shall 
The Major Heads of account, falling see that proper accounts of the receipts 
within the sectors for expenditure heads, and expenditure, as the case may be, are 
generally correspond to functions of maintained in such form as may have 
Government, while the Minor Heads been prescribed for the financial 
identify the programmes undertaken to transactions of Government with which 
achieve the objectives of the functions he is concerned and tender accurately 
represented by the Major Head. The Sub and promptly all such accounts and 
Head represents schemes, the Detailed returns relating to them as may be 
Head denotes sub scheme and Object required by Government, Controlling 
Head represent the primary unit of Officer or Accounts Officer, as the case 
appropriation showing the economic may be. 
nature of expenditure such as salaries Rule82 Classification should be recorded in 
and wages, office expenses, travel all the bills and challans by Drawing 
expenses, professional services, grants- Officers. Suitable classification shall be 
in-aid, etc. The above six tiers are recorded by Drawing Officers on all bills 
represented by a unique 15-digit numeric drawn by them. Similarly, classification 
code. on challans crediting Government money 

Rule 79 Authority to open a new Head of into the Bank shall be indicated or 
Account. The List of Major and Minor recorded by Departmental Officers 
Heads of Accounts of Union and States is responsible for the collection of 
maintained by the Ministry of Finance Government dues, etc. In cases of doubt 
(Department of Expenditure – Controller regarding the Head under which a 
General of Accounts) which is authorised transaction should be accounted, the 
to open a new head of account on the matter shall be referred to the Principal 
advice of the Comptroller and Auditor Accounts Officer of the Ministry/ 
General of India under the powers flowing Department concerned for clarification of 
from Article 150 of the Constitution. It the Ministry of Finance and the Controller 
contains General Directions for opening General of Accounts, wherever 
Heads of Accounts and a complete list of necessary. 
the Sectors, Major, Sub-Major and Minor Rule 83 Charged or Voted Expenditure. The 
Heads of Accounts and also some expenditure covered under Article 112 (3) 
Sub/detailed heads, authorised to be so of the Constitution of India is charged on 
opened. the Consolidated Fund of India and is not 
Ministries/Departments may open Sub- subject to vote by the legislature. All other 
Heads and Detailed Heads as required expenditure met out of the Consolidated 
by them in consultation with the Budget Fund of India is treated as Voted 
Division of the Ministry of Finance. Their expenditure. Charged or Voted 
Principal Accounts Offices may open Expenditure shall be shown separately in 
Sub/Detailed Heads required under the the accounts as well as in the Budget 
Minor Heads falling within the Public documents. 
Account of India subject to the above Rule 84 Capital or Revenue Expenditure. 
stipulations. Significant expenditure incurred with the 
The Object Heads have been prescribed object of acquiring tangible assets of a 
under Government of India’s Orders permanent nature (for use in the 
below Rule 8 of Delegation of Financial organisation and not for sale in the 

 19 



ordinary course of business) or level of implementation on PFMS 
enhancing the utility of existing assets, to track fund flow and unspent 
shall broadly be defined as Capital balances. 
expenditure. (3) All the payment, to the extent 
Subsequent charges on maintenance, possible, shall be released ‘just-
repair, upkeep and working expenses, in-time’ by the Ministries through 
which are required to maintain the assets PFMS. 
in a running order as also all other (4) Detailed Demand for Grants 
expenses incurred for the day to day (DDG), as approved, must be 
running of the organisation, including uploaded on PFMS at the start of 
establishment and administrative each Financial Year. 
expenses shall be classified as Revenue (5) All the re-appropriation orders, 
expenditure. Capital and Revenue surrender order shall be 
expenditure shall be shown separately in generated through PFMS 
the Accounts. system. 

Rule 85 Banking Arrangements. The Reserve (6) All grantee institutions shall 
Bank of India (RBI) shall be the banker to submit Utilisation Certificates on 
the Government. It shall maintain cash PFMS. 
balance of the Government and provide Rule 87 Direct Benefit Transfer. 
banking facilities to the Ministries and (1) Transfer of benefits should be 
subordinate or attached offices either done directly to beneficiaries 
directly through its own offices or through under various Government 
its agent banks. For this purpose, RBI Schemes and Programmes using 
shall, in consultation with the Controller Information and Communication 
General of Accounts, nominate a bank to Technology (ICT). Necessary 
function as Accredited Bank of a Ministry process reengineering to 
or Department. Pay & Accounts offices minimise intermediary levels and 
and Cheque Drawing and Disbursing to reduce delay in payments to 
Officer shall have assignment accounts intended beneficiaries with the 
with the identified branches of the objective of minimising pilferage 
Accredited Bank of the Ministry. All and duplication should be done 
payments shall be made through these for all Government Schemes and 
identified bank branches. These Programmes. The process for 
branches shall also collect departmental implementation of DBT as 
and other receipts. Tax revenues of the prescribed should be adopted. 
Government shall be collected by the RBI (2) DBT should include in-kind and 
through its own offices or through the cash transfers to beneficiaries as 
nominated branches of its agent banks. well as transfers/honorariums 
Note: Detailed procedure to be followed given to various enablers of 
for remittance of Government receipts government schemes like 
into Government cash balance and community workers, etc. for 
reimbursement of payments made on successful implementation of the 
behalf of Government by the banks are schemes. 
laid down in the Memoranda of (3) Transfer of cash benefits from 
Instructions issued by the Reserve Bank Ministries/Departments should 
of India. be done (a) directly to 

Rule 86 Public Financial Management System beneficiaries from 
(PFMS).— Ministries/Departments; (b) 
(1) Public Financial Management through State Treasury Account; 

System (PFMS), an integrated or (c) through any Implementing 
Financial Management System Agency as appointed by Central / 
of Controller General of State Governments. 
Accounts, Government of India, (4) In-kind Transfer to Individual 
shall be used for sanction Beneficiary/ Household/Service 
preparation, bill processing, provider includes schemes or 
payment, receipt management, components of schemes where 
Direct Benefit Transfer, fund flow in-kind benefits are given by the 
management and financial Government or through any 
reporting. Implementing Agency as 

(2) All the ministries sanctioning appointed by   Centre/State 
grant-in-aid shall register all Governments to Individual 
implementing agencies till last Beneficiary/ Household/ Service 

 20 



providers. General of Accounts countersigned by 
(5) Ministries/Departments will use the Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of 

PFMS platform for processing of Finance. 
payments for cash / in kind Rule90 Presentation of Annual accounts. The 
transfers to individual Appropriation and Finance accounts 
beneficiaries as per framework mentioned above, shall be prepared by 
laid down by Department of the respective authorities on the dates 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. mutually agreed upon with the 

(6) Implementing Agencies shall Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 
generate Electronic Utilisation in the forms prescribed by the President 
Certificate (E-UCs) on PFMS on the advice of the Comptroller and 
portal and submit them online. E- Auditor General of India and sent to the 
UCs shall be used to certify that latter for recording his/her certificate. The 
money was actually utilized for certified Annual Accounts and the 
the purpose for which it was Reports relating to the accounts shall be 
sanctioned to eliminate the need submitted by the Comptroller and Auditor 
for physical generation of UCs. General of India to the President in 

(7) Transaction charges for the accordance with the provisions of Section 
financial intermediaries 11 of the Comptroller and Auditor 
facilitating DBT payments shall General’s (Duties, Powers and 
be paid as stipulated by Ministry Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 and 
of Finance. Clause (1) of Article 151 of the 

 Constitution of India. 
II. ANNUAL ACCOUNTS Rule 91 Administrative Ministries / PSUs / 
 Subordinate / Statutory / Autonomous 
Rule88 Appropriation Accounts. Appropriation Bodies may have financial stakes in 

Accounts of Central Ministries (other than Public Private Partnerships (PPP)/ 
Ministry of Railways) and of Central Civil Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs)/ 
Departments (excluding Department of Joint Ventures (JV’s)/ Subsidiary 
Posts and Defence Services) shall be companies etc. In such case details of the 
prepared by the Principal Accounts financial stakes of the Government or 
Officers of the respective Ministries and other entities mentioned above, should 
Departments (under the guidance and be disclosed in the Annual Report of the 
supervision of the Controller General of Administrative Ministry. 
Accounts) and signed by their respective  
Chief Accounting Authorities i.e., the III. PROFORMA ACCOUNTS 
Secretaries in the concerned Ministries or  
Departments. Union Government Rule 92 Subsidiary Accounts of Government 
Appropriation Accounts (Civil) required to Departments undertaking commercial 
be submitted to Parliament, shall be activities. Where the operations of 
prepared annually by the Controller certain Government Departments 
General of Accounts by consolidating the working on a commercial or quasi-
aforesaid Appropriation Accounts. commercial basis e.g., an industrial 
Appropriation Accounts pertaining to factory or a store cannot be suitably 
Departments of Posts and Defence brought within the cash-based 
Services shall be prepared and signed by Government accounting system, the 
the Secretaries to the Government of Head of the units shall be required to 
India in the Department of Posts and maintain such subsidiary proforma 
Ministry of Defence respectively and that accounts in commercial form as may be 
of Ministry of Railways by the Chairman, agreed between Government and 
Railway Board. Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

Rule 89 Finance Accounts. Annual accounts of This includes the maintenance of suitable 
the Government of India (including Manufacturing, Trading, Profit & Loss 
transactions of Department of Posts and Accounts and Balance Sheet. 
Ministries of Defence and Railways and Rule93 Methods and principles on which 
transactions under Public Account of subsidiary accounts in commercial 
India of Union Territory Governments), form are to be kept. The methods and 
showing under the respective Heads the principles in accordance with which 
annual receipts and disbursements and subsidiary and proforma accounts in 
statement of balances for the purpose of commercial form are to be kept shall be 
the Union, called Finance Accounts, shall regulated by orders and instructions 
be prepared and signed by the Controller issued by Government in each case. 

 21 



Note 1. Proforma accounts of regular Account. The Personal Deposit Account 
Government Workshops and Factories shall be authorised to be opened by a 
shall be kept in accordance with the special order by the concerned Ministry 
detailed rules and procedure prescribed or Department in consultation with the 
in the departmental regulations. Proforma Controller General of Accounts. Such 
accounts relating to Public Works shall be special order or permission shall be 
prepared by the Accounts Officers in issued or granted by the Ministry or 
accordance with the instructions Department concerned after it is satisfied 
contained in Account Code for that the initial accounts of the moneys to 
Accountants General. be held in a personal deposit account and 
Note 2. The Heads of Account (which disbursed, shall be arranged to be 
should, as far as possible, be common to maintained properly and shall be subject 
the Government accounts and the to audit. Every personal deposit account 
General Ledger maintained by a so authorised to be opened, shall form 
Commercial Undertaking) shall be part of the Government Account and be 
selected with due regard to the principles located in the Public Account thereof. The 
of Governmental and Commercial provisions relating to “Personal Deposit 
accounting so that the monthly classified Account” are contained in para 16.7 of 
account of income and expenditure of the Civil Accounts Manual and Rule 191 to 
undertaking may be prepared readily 194 of Central Government Account 
from the General Ledger maintained by it. (Receipts and Payments) Rules. 

Rule 94 Adequate regulations to be framed to Rule 97 (2) Personal Deposit accounts shall 
ensure cost deduced is accurate and generally be authorised to be opened in 
true. Where commercial accounts are the following types of cases: 
maintained for the purpose of (a) In favour of a Designated Officer 
assessment of the cost of an article or appointed for the purpose of 
service, the Head of the unit shall ensure administering monies tendered 
that adequate regulations are framed with by or on behalf of wards and 
the approval of Government in order to attached estates under 
ensure that the cost deduced from the Government management. It 
accounts is accurate and true. shall also be ensured that proper 

Rule 95 Maintenance and submission of arrangements are made for the 
subsidiary accounts and statements maintenance and audit of 
by department units. The Head of the connected initial accounts; 
unit shall arrange to obtain the orders of (b) in relation to Civil and Criminal 
Government regarding the nature and Courts’ deposits, in favour of the 
form of subsidiary accounts and Chief Judicial Authority 
statements, if any. Such accounts and concerned; 
statements shall be submitted to the (c) where, under certain regulatory 
Accounts Officer on such date as may be activities of the Government, 
required by him. The same shall be receipts are realised and credited 
appended to the Appropriation Accounts to a Fund or Account under the 
of each year. provisions of an Act to be utilised 

 towards expenditure thereunder 
IV. PERSONAL DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS and no outgo from the 
 Consolidated Fund is involved. 
Rule 96 Personal Deposit Account. Personal (d) where a personal deposit 

Deposit Account is a device intended to account is required to be created 
facilitate the Designated Officer thereof to by a law or rules having the force 
credit receipts into and effect withdrawals of law and certain liabilities 
directly from the account, subject to an devolve on the Government out 
overall check being exercised by the of the special enactments; 
bank in which the account is authorised (e) officers commanding units and 
to be opened. The Designated Officer others concerned in the 
shall ensure (with the help of a personal administration of public funds in 
ledger account to be maintained by the the Defence Departments can be 
bank for the purpose) that no withdrawal authorised to open personal 
will result in a minus balance therein. deposit accounts for such funds. 
Only Government officers acting in their  
official or any other capacity shall be the V. CAPITAL AND REVENUE ACCOUNTS 
Designated Officer thereof.  

Rule 97 (1) Authority to open Personal Deposit Rule 98 Capital Expenditure. Significant 

 22 



expenditure incurred with the object of (b) Subject to Clause (c) below, 
acquiring tangible assets of a permanent revenue shall bear subsequent 
nature (for use in the organisation and not charges for maintenance and all 
for sale in the ordinary course of working expenses. These 
business) or enhancing the utility of embrace all expenditure on the 
existing assets, shall broadly be defined working and upkeep of the 
as Capital expenditure. Subsequent, project and also on renewals   
charges on maintenance, repair, upkeep and   replacements   and 
and working expenses, which are additions, improvements or 
required to maintain the assets in a extensions that are revenue in 
running order as also all other expenses nature as per rules made by 
incurred for the day to day running of the Government. 
organisation, including establishment (c) In the case of works of renewal 
and administrative expenses, shall be and replacement, which partake 
classified as Revenue expenditure. expenditure both of a capital and 
Capital and Revenue expenditure shall revenue nature, the allocation of 
be shown separately in the Accounts. expenditure shall be regulated by 
Expenditure on a temporary asset or on the broad principle that Revenue 
grants-in-aid cannot ordinarily be should pay or provide a fund for 
considered as a capital expenditure and the adequate re- placement of all 
shall not, except in cases specifically wastage or depreciation of 
authorised by the President on the advice property originally provided out of 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of capital grants. Only the cost of 
India, be debited to a Capital Head. genuine improvements, which 
Capital expenditure is generally met from enhance the useful life of the 
receipts of capital nature, as asset whether determined by 
distinguished from ordinary revenues prescribed rules or formulae, or 
derived from taxes, duties, fees, fines and under special orders of 
similar items of current income including Government, may be debited to 
extraordinary receipts. It is open to the Capital. Where under special 
Government to meet capital expenditure orders of Government, a 
from ordinary revenues, provided there Depreciation or Renewals 
are sufficient revenue resources to cover Reserve Fund is established for 
this liability. renewing assets of any 
Expenditure of a Capital nature as commercial department or 
defined above, shall not be classed as undertaking, the distribution of 
Capital expenditure in the Government expenditure on renewals and 
Accounts unless the classification has replacements between Capital 
been expressly authorised by general or and the Fund shall be so 
special orders of Government. regulated as to guard against 
Expenditure of a Capital nature shall be over-capitalisation on the one 
distinguished from the Revenue hand and excessive withdrawals 
Expenditure both in the Budget Estimates from the Fund on the other. 
and in Government Accounts. (d) Expenditure on account of 

Rule99 Principles for allocation of reparation of damage caused by 
expenditure between Capital and extraordinary calamities such as 
Revenue. The following are the main flood, fire, earthquake, enemy 
principles governing the allocation of action, etc., shall be charged to 
expenditure between Revenue and Capital, or to Revenue, or divided 
Capital: between them, depending upon 
(a) Capital shall bear all charges for whether such expenditure results 

the first construction and in creation/acquisition of new 
equipment of a project as well as assets or whether it is only for 
charges for intermediate restoring the condition of the 
maintenance of the work while existing assets, as may be 
not yet opened for service. It shall determined by Government 
also bear charges for such according to the circumstance of 
further additions and each case. 
improvements, which enhance (e) Expenditure on a temporary 
the useful life of the asset, as asset cannot ordinarily be 
may be sanctioned under rules considered as a capital 
made by competent authority. expenditure and shall not, except 

 23 



in cases specifically authorised such conversion of loans may be 
by the President on the advice of explained in the relevant 
the Comptroller and Auditor Budget/Supplementary Demand 
General of India, be debited to a documents. After obtaining the approval 
Capital Head. of the Parliament, the balances under 

Rule 100 Allocation between capital and loans and the progressive expenditure of 
revenue expenditure: The allocation the Capital Heads of Accounts shall be 
between capital and revenue expenditure corrected proforma in the relevant 
on a Capital Scheme for which separate Accounts of the Union Government, 
Capital and Revenue Accounts are to be under the Loan/Capital Major Heads 
kept, shall be determined in accordance concerned. 
with such general or special orders as  
may be prescribed by the Government VI. INTEREST ON CAPITAL 
after consultation with the Comptroller  
and Auditor General of India. Rule 104 Interest rate. Except in special cases 

Rule101 Capital receipts during construction regulated by special orders of 
mainly to be utilised in reduction of Government, interest at such rates as 
capital expenditure: Capital receipts in may be specified from time to time shall 
so far they relate to expenditure be charged in the accounts of all 
previously debited to Capital accruing Commercial Departments or units for 
during the process of construction of a which separate capital and revenue 
project, shall be utilised in reduction of accounts are maintained within the 
capital expenditure. Thereafter their Government accounts. 
treatment in the accounts will depend on Rule 105 (1) Charging of interest on capital 
circumstances, but except under special outlay met out of specific loans raised 
rule or order of Government, they shall by Government. For capital outlay met 
not be credited to the revenue account of out of specific loans raised by 
the department or undertaking. Government, the interest shall be 

Rule 102 Receipts and recoveries representing charged at such rate as may be 
recoveries of expenditure previously prescribed by Government, having 
debited to Capital Major Head: regard to the rate of interest actually paid 
Receipts and recoveries on Capital on such loans and the incidental charges 
Account in so far as they represent incurred in raising and managing them. 
recoveries of expenditure previously By specific loans are meant loans that are 
debited to a Capital Major Head shall be raised in the open market for one specific 
taken in reduction of expenditure under purpose which is clearly specified in the 
the Major Head concerned except where, prospectus and in regard to which definite 
under the rules of allocation applicable to information is given at the time of raising 
a particular department, such receipts of the loans. 
have to be taken to Revenue. Rule 105 (2) For capital outlay provided otherwise, 

Rule 103 Conversion of outstanding loans into interest shall be charged at the rate of 
equity investments or grants-in-aid. interest to be determined each year by 
Government takes from time to time, the Department of Economic Affairs, 
suitable measures to strengthen/ Ministry of Finance. 
restructure the Capital base of public Rule 106 Method of calculation of interest. The 
sector enterprises so that these interest shall be calculated on the direct 
enterprises can improve their capital outlay at the end of the previous 
performance and productivity. As a part year plus half the outlay of the year itself, 
of the package scheme, financial relief in irrespective of whether such outlay has 
the form of conversion of outstanding been met from current revenues or from 
loans into equity investments or grants- other sources. 
in-aid are also agreed to. Rule 107 How interest charged to capital is to be 
Where loans outstanding against Public written back. When under any special 
Sector Undertakings are proposed to be orders of Government, charges for 
converted into equity investments in or as interest during the process of 
grants-in-aid to the Public Sector construction of a project are temporarily 
Undertakings, the approval of the met from capital, the writing back of 
Parliament to such proposals, shall be capitalised interest shall form the first 
obtained by including a token provision in charge on any capital receipts or surplus 
the relevant Demands for Grants or revenue derived from the project when 
Supplementary Demands for Grants as opened for working. 
may be found expedient. The details of  

 24 



VII. ADJUSTMENT WITH GOVERNMENT Union Territories) and the State 
DEPARTMENTS ETC Governments have agreed under 

 reciprocal arrangements not to prefer 
Rule 108 Adjustments with State Governments. petty and isolated claims for an amount 

Subject to the relevant provision of the not exceeding Rupees ten thousand 
Constitution or of law made by Parliament against one another 
or any orders issued thereunder, Rule 112 Criteria in determining whether a 
adjustments in respect of financial particular claim is covered by the 
transactions with State Governments reciprocal arrangement. The significant 
shall, unless otherwise provided for, be criterion in determining whether a 
made in such manner, and to such extent particular claim is covered by the 
as may be mutually agreed upon reciprocal arrangement mentioned 
between the Central Government and the above, will be that the claim shall be both 
State Government concerned. However, petty and of an occasional character and 
adjustments with State Government in shall cover services rendered and not 
respect of the matters mentioned below supplies made unless the latter forms 
shall be regulated by the rules contained part of service. The term “service 
in Appendix-5 to the Government rendered” will be taken to mean an 
Accounting Rules, 1990. The rules are individual act of service, like providing 
based on reciprocal arrangements made police escort to a high dignitary and will 
with the State Governments and are, not apply to supply of stores etc. Claims 
therefore, binding on all of them: - relating to Commercial undertakings 
(i) Pay and Allowances, other than under the Government of India or the 

Leave Salaries. State Governments such as those of the 
(ii) Leave Salaries. Railways, the Department of Post, the 
(iii) Pensions. Electrical undertakings, etc., shall fall 
(iv) Expenditure involved in Audit and outside the purview of the proposed 

keeping Accounts. reciprocal arrangements and shall 
(v) Cost of Police functions on continue to be settled as hitherto. 

Railways including the cost of If a doubt arises as to whether a particular 
protecting Railway Bridges. claim would fall within or outside the 

(vi) Cost of Forest Surveys carried purview of the proposed arrangement, it 
out by the Survey of India, and shall be decided by mutual consultation. 
Forest maps prepared by that The above arrangements will remain in 
Department. force without any time limit in respect of 

(vii) Leave Salary and Pension all State Governments. 
Contributions recovered in Rule 113 Projects jointly executed by several 
respect of Government servants State Governments. In the case of 
lent on Foreign Service Projects, jointly executed by several 

Rule 109 Re-audit. As a convention, a period of Governments, where the expenditure is 
three years has been accepted by the to be shared by the participating 
Central and State Governments for the Governments in agreed proportions, but 
re- audit of past transactions involving the expenditure is ab-initio incurred by 
errors in classification one Government and shares of other 

Rule110 When adjustment necessary. participating Governments recovered 
Adjustment shall always be made unless subsequently; such recoveries from other 
otherwise agreed upon — Governments shall be exhibited as 
(a) If a commercial department or abatement of charges under the relevant 

undertaking or a regularly expenditure Head of Account in the 
organised store department or books of the Governments incurring the 
store section of a department is expenditure initially 
concerned, or Rule 114 Claims of State Governments on 

(b) If under the operation of any rule account of the extra cost of agency 
or order, an adjustment would functions. Claims of State Governments, 
have been made if the particular on account of the extra cost of agency 
transaction withState functions entrusted to them under Article 
Government were a transaction 258 of the Constitution shall be dealt with 
between two departments of the and settled in accordance with such 
Central Government. directions as may be issued by the 

Rule 111 Petty and isolated claims for services President in this regard from time to time 
rendered not to be preferred. The Rule 115 The following principles shall be generally 
Central Government (which includes observed in dealing with claims preferred 

 25 



by State Governments under Clause (3) annual statement of 
of Article 258 of the Constitution: — proposed charges from the 
(i) If the agency work involves the State Government at the 

employment of a State time of preparation of the 
Commercial Department, it would Budget. However, if in any 
be open to that department to individual case, the 
charge its normal commercial charges are obviously 
costs. static, then the contract 

(ii) Public Works Department system may be adopted in 
agency costs shall be these cases also. 
represented by such percentage (v) In exceptional cases in which 
charges on the cost of Central arbitration has to be resorted to, 
Works executed by the State as the Ministry of Finance will make 
may be agreed between the the requisite arrangement in the 
Central and the State matter. 
Government concerned, works (vi) The Ministry of Finance shall be 
outlay being treated as an consulted on all matters arising 
amount placed at the disposal of under Article 258 (3) of the 
the State Government for actual Constitution. 
expenditure on the execution of Rule 116 Principles governing transactions in 
the work. connection with the agency functions 

(iii) The cost of regular joint entrusted to State Government. The 
establishment shall be shared as following procedure shall be followed in 
far as practicable on the basis of regard to transactions arising in 
fixed annual sums settled in connection with the agency functions 
agreement with the State entrusted to the State Governments 
Government concerned. under Article 258 of the Constitution: 

(iv) In other cases, the following (i) The expenditure on extra staff 
procedure shall be adopted or contingencies which the 
unless there are special orders to State Government have to 
the contrary:- incur-The extra cost to the State 
(a) Details of claims preferred Government arising mainly in 

by State Governments respect of the additional staff 
shall be ascertained. employed or contingent and 

(b) If the work has been other expenditure, as in the case 
performed by the State of work devolving on the State 
Government in the past, Governments in connection with 
the charges shall be the administration of the Census 
compared with those Act, is reimbursable under Article 
charged in the past but it is 258 (3) of the Constitution. 
not necessary to be Expenditure in this regard shall 
meticulous in the matter. be provided in the State Budget 

(c) If the charges are found to in the first instance and adjusted 
be reasonable and do not in the accounts of the State 
exceed Rupees Fifty Governments under the normal 
thousand per annum for Heads of Accounts. These will be 
any individual item (or reimbursed in lumpsum to the 
connected group of items), State Governments, necessary 
a five years contract shall provision being made under a 
be offered to the State distinct sub-head ”Amounts paid 
Government during which to other Governments, 
the Central Government Departments, etc.”, under the 
would pay the fixed sum concerned Demand of the 
per annum for the work. Ministry administratively 
The amount will be concerned with the subject. In 
subjected to review at the computing the extra cost, the 
end of each period of five element of leave and pensionary 
years. charges can also be included, 

(d) If the amount agreed upon provided the relevant service and 
exceeds Rupees Fifty financial rules of the State 
thousand, it shall be Governments provide for this. 
necessary to have an  

 26 



(ii) The expenditure on work  
entrusted to the State  
Government, such as therefore, be made to settle as far as 
expenditure on construction possible all transactions with State 
and maintenance of National Governments before the close of the 
Highways, expenditure on year. 
Defence Works, Aviation   
Works, etc.-The expenditure Rule 118 Adjustments with foreign 
directly connected with the Governments, outside bodies, etc. 
execution of the scheme or work Unless exempted by Government by 
entrusted to the State general or special orders, services shall 
Government such as expenditure not be rendered to any foreign 
on the construction or Government or non-Government body or 
maintenance of National institution or to a separate fund 
Highways etc., will be adjusted constituted as such except on payment. 
direct in the accounts of the Rule 119 Recoveries of expenditure for services 
Central Government under the rendered to non-Government parties. 
relevant Head of Account. The Recoveries of expenditure for services 
question of including the rendered or supplies made to non- 
estimates in this regard in the Government parties or other 
Budget of the State Governments Governments (including local funds and 
and subjecting them to the vote Governments outside India), shall in all 
of the State Legislature will not cases, be classified as receipts of the 
arise. The expenditure will be Government rendering such services. 
adjusted under the Head “8658 – Rule 120 Recoveries of expenditure for services 
Suspense Accounts –PAO rendered as an agent. When a 
Suspense” in the Remittance Government undertakes a service merely 
Section of the State Accounts in as an agent of a private body, the entire 
the first instance pending their cost of the service shall be recovered 
eventual clearance in from that body so that the net cost to 
accordance with the prescribed Government is nil. The recoveries shall 
procedure. be taken as reduction of expenditure. 

Note: In the converse case relating to the Explanation: The term ‘recovery’ is used 
entrustment of a State function to the in these rules to denote repayment of, or 
Central Government under Article258-A payment by non-Government parties or 
of the Constitution, a procedure similar to other Governments towards charges 
that indicated in the Rule 116 above shall initially incurred and classified by a 
be followed. The extra cost on staff and Central Government Department in the 
other contingent expenditure, etc., will account, as final expenditure by debit to 
accordingly have to be provided in the a Revenue or Capital Head of Account. 
Budget of the Central Government in the Recoveries towards establishment 
usual manner and recovery made in charges, tools and plants, fees for 
lumpsum from the State Government procurement of inspection of stores or 
concerned. The other expenditure on both etc., effected at percentage rates or 
execution of the work proper should be otherwise, are some examples. 
debited to the State Government Rule 121 Payments to outside body or fund to 
concerned directly and the question of be through grant-in-aid. Any relief in 
obtaining a vote of the Parliament for the respect of payment for services rendered 
same will not arise. or supplies made to any outside body or 

Rule 117 Crucial date for closure of Inter- fund shall ordinarily be given through a 
Governmental adjustments. Inter- grant-in-aid rather than by remission of 
Governmental adjustments can be dues. 
carried out upto the 10th of April or the Rule 122 Charges relating to the maintenance 
date as specified by office of Controller and demarcations and disputes over 
General of Accounts in consultation with boundaries. The incidence of charges 
Reserve Bank of India from time to relating to the maintenance and 
time[1A] on which date the books of the demarcations and disputes over 
Reserve Bank are closed for the month of boundaries between India and a 
March. Every endeavour must,  foreigncountry is regulated by the 

 following principles; 
 (i) Maintenance – Half the 
1A Inserted vide DoE ID No. TA-2-03001/(03)/1/2022-TA-

maintenance charges will be 
II(e10997)/52 dated 18.01.2024.  

 27 



borne by the Central payments. For purposes of inter- 
Government, the other half being Departmental payments, the 
recovered, as far as practicable, Departments of a Government shall be 
from the foreign country, failing divided into service Departments and 
which the foreign country’s share commercial departments according to the 
will also be borne by the Central following principles: - 
Government. (i) Service Departments-These are 

(ii) Demarcation and Disputes – constituted for the discharge of 
Charges relating to demarcation those functions which either - 
of boundaries and boundary (a) Are inseparable from and 
disputes will be borne by the form part of the idea of 
Central Government under Entry Government e.g. 
10 of the Union List, subject to Departments of 
such recovery as shall be made Administration of Justice, 
from the Foreign Country. Jails, Police, Education, 

(iii) Where streams or other Medical, Public Health, 
watercourses form the Forest, Defence; or 
boundaries and where the (b) Are necessary to, and form 
ordinary principle of median line part of, the general conduct 
applies, the Government of the business of 
concerned (i.e., Foreign Country Government e.g. 
or India) will bear the cost of Departments of Survey, 
maintenance of the boundary line Government Printing, 
on its side. Where a separate set Stationery, Public Works 
of survey marks is maintained by (Building and Roads 
each of the two Governments on Branch), Central Purchase 
its side, the cost of maintenance Organisation (Director-
of the survey marks shall be General of Supplies and 
borne by the Government Disposals, New Delhi). 
concerned. (ii) Commercial Departments or 
Exception: Undertakings.- These are 
(a) The arrangement in (i) established mainly for the 

above in its application to purposes of rendering services or 
Nepal will be subject to providing supplies, of certain 
special arrangements special kinds, on payment for the 
worked out in consultation services rendered or for the 
with the Nepal Government. articles supplied. They perform 

(b) The share of the Bhutan functions, which are not 
Government for necessarily governmental 
maintenance and functions. They are required to 
demarcation of and disputes work to a financial result 
over boundaries will be determined through accounts 
borne by the Central maintained on commercial 
Government for the present principles. 

 Rule 125 Period for preferment of claims. All 
VIII. INTER-DEPARTMENTAL claims shall ordinarily be preferred 

ADJUSTMENTS between Departments, both commercial 
 and non-commercial of the Central 
Rule 123 Inter-Departmental Adjustments. Save Government, within the same financial 

as expressly provided by any general or year and not beyond three years from the 
special orders, a Service Department date of transaction. This limitation, 
shall not charge other Departments for however, may be waived in specific 
services rendered or supplies made cases by mutual agreement between the 
which falls within the class of duties for departments concerned. 
which the former Department is Rule 126 Procedure for settlement of inter-
constituted. However, a commercial departmental adjustments. The 
Department or undertaking shall settlement of inter- departmental 
ordinarily charge and be charged for any adjustments shall be regulated by the 
supplies made and services rendered to, directions contained in Chapter 4 of 
or by, other departments of Government. Government Accounting Rules, 1990. 

Rule 124 Principles for division of Departments Rule 127 Inter-departmental and other 
for purposes of inter-departmental adjustments to be made in the account 

 28 



year. Under the directions contained in Account etc. Recovery actually effected, 
the Account Code for Accountants irrespective of the year to which it relates 
General, Inter-departmental and other shall be adjusted in accounts in the 
adjustments are not to be made in the schedule of recovery to be attached to 
accounts of the past year, if they could the Appropriation Account of the year in 
not have been reasonably anticipated in which the recovery is affected. 
time for funds being obtained from the  
proper authority. In all cases, where the Rule 128 Adjustment of Pensionary Charges of 
adjustment could have reasonably been certain Commercial Departments. 
anticipated as, for example, recurring Except as otherwise provided, the 
payments to another Government or pensionary liability of commercial 
department and payments which, though departments and undertakings, for which 
not of fixed amount, are of a fixed pro forma commercial accounts are 
character, etc., the Accounts Officer will maintained, shall be assessed on a 
automatically make the adjustment in the contribution basis at such rates as may 
accounts before they are finally closed. be fixed by Government from time to time. 
The onus of proving that the adjustments In the case of departments and 
could not have been reasonably undertakings, for which no regular 
anticipated should lie with the Controlling commercial accounts are maintained 
Officer. either within or outside the regular 
As between different Departments of the Government accounts but which are 
same Government, the recoveries allowed to charge for their products or 
effected for services rendered shall be services rendered, the pensionary liability 
classified as deductions from the gross shall be taken into account in the 
expenditure. However, recoveries made estimate of overhead charges and 
by a Commercial Department, e.g., manufacturing costs for the purpose of 
Railways, Posts or a departmental calculating the issue price of goods 
commercial undertaking in respect of manufactured or fees for services 
services rendered in pursuance of the rendered. The calculation shall be made 
functions for which the Commercial at rates prescribed for the purpose by 
Department is constituted shall be treated Government. 
as receipts of the Department but where NOTE: The Railways, Posts and Defence 
it acts as an agent for the discharge of Departments are regarded as separate 
functions not germane to the essential Governments for the purpose of 
purpose of the Department, the adjustment of pensionary charges. 
recoveries shall be taken as reduction of Rule 129 Pensionary liability in the case of 
expenditure. Government Departments / Undertakings 
Exception-Recoveries of fees for declared as commercial. In the case of 
purchase, inspection, etc., effected by the Government Departments and 
Central Purchase Organizations of Undertakings declared as commercial, 
Government of India, are treated as adjustment of Pensionary liability shall be 
receipts of the Department concerned. made in the regular accounts by charging 
NOTE 1.-The term ‘recovery’ is used in the average of the percentage for 15th 
this rule to denote repayment of/or year of service based on the rates of 
payment by one Department of the same monthly contribution of pension as 
Government towards charges initially prescribed in the appropriate order 
incurred and classified by another issued from time to time under Appendix-
Department in its accounts as final II of Fundamental and Supplementary 
expenditure by debit to a Revenue or Rules.
Capital Head of Account. Recoveries 
towards establishment charges, tools and 
plants, fees for procurement or inspection 
of stores or both, etc., effected at 
percentage rates or otherwise, are some 
examples. 
NOTE 2.-Recoveries effected from 
another Department of the same 
Government which are to be classified as 
deduction from the gross expenditure, 
shall be shown in the relevant Demand 
for Grant as “below the line” recovery 
under the appropriate Major Head of 

 29 



Ch.-5 WORKS Service (MES), Border Roads Organisation 
Rule 130 Original works means all new (BRO), etc. or Ministry/ Department's 

constructions, site preparation, additions and construction wings of Ministries of Railways, 
alterations to existing works, special repairs to Defence, Environment & Forests, Information & 
newly purchased or previously abandoned Broadcasting and Departments of Posts, and 
buildings or structures, including remodeling or Space etc. 
replacement. Rule 133 (3) As an alternative to 133(2), a 

Minor works mean works which add Ministry or Department may award 
capital value to existing assets but repair works estimated to cost above 
do not create new assets. [Rupees Sixty Lakhs]5 and original 
Repair works means works works of any value to: 
undertaken to maintain building and (i) any Public Sector Undertaking 
fixtures. Works will also include set up by the Central or State 
services or goods incidental or Government to carry out civil or 
consequential to the original or electrical works or 
repair works. (ii) to any other Central/ State 

Rule 131 Administrative control of works Government organisation/ PSU 
includes: which may be notified by the 
(i) assumption of full responsibility Ministry of Housing and Urban 

for construction, maintenance Affairs (MoHUA) for such 
and upkeep; purpose after evaluating their 

(ii) proper utilization of buildings financial strength and technical 
and allied works; competence. 

(iii) provision of funds for execution For the award of work under this sub-
of these functions. rule, the Ministry/ Department shall 

Rule 132 Powers to sanction works. The ensure competition among such 
powers delegated to various PSUs/ Organisations. This 
subordinate authorities to accord competition shall be essentially on 
administrative approval, sanction the lump sum service charges to be 
expenditure and re-appropriate claimed for execution of work. 
funds for works are regulated by the In exceptional cases, for award of 

Delegation of Financial Powers work under (i) and (ii) above, on 
Rules, and other orders contained in nomination basis, the conditions 
the respective departmental contained in Rule 194 would apply. 
regulations. The work under these circumstances 

Rule 133 (1) A Ministry or Department at its shall also be awarded only on the 
discretion may directly execute basis of lump sum service charge 
repair works estimated to cost up to [Note:  
[Rupees Sixty Lakhs]3 after following (i) Scientific Ministries/ Departments 
due procedure indicated in Rule 139, can assign repair Works estimated to 
159 & 160. cost up to Rs 5 crore on nomination 

Rule 133 (2) A Ministry or Department may, at basis even in normal cases only to the 
its discretion, assign repair works estimated to organizations specified in this sub-
cost above [Rupees Sixty Lakhs]4 and original/ rule of GFRs.  
minor works of any value to any Public Works (ii) This special provision will be 

Organisation (PWO) such as Central Public applicable upto 31.03.2025. 
Works Department (CPWD), State Public Works Thereafter review will be made by 
Department, others Central Government Department of Expenditure to decide 
organisations authorised to carry out civil or on further extension of these 

powers.]6
electrical works such as Military Engineering  

 
3 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of Bio-
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. technology, Department of Scientific & Industrial 
4 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated Research, Department of Atomic Energy, Department 

10.07.2024. of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Defence Research 
5 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated and Development Organisation, Indian Council of 

10.07.2024. Agricultural Research (ICAR), including its affiliated 
6 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.20/42/2021-PPD dated institutions and Universities, Department of Health 

20.05.2024. The Scientific Ministries/ Departments/ Research (DHR), including Indian Council of Medical 

Organization of Government of India are Department Research, Educational and Research Institutes 

 30 



Rule 134 Work under the administrative (vi) tenders invited and processed 
control of the Public Works in accordance with rules. 
Departments. Works not specifically (vii) a Work Order issued. 
allotted to any Ministry or Rule 136 (2) On grounds of urgency or 
Department shall be included in the otherwise, if it becomes necessary to 
Grants for Civil Works to be carry out a work or incur a liability 
administered by Central Public Works under circumstances when the 
Department. No such work may be provisions set out under sub rule 1 
financed partly from funds provided of rule 136 cannot be complied with, 
in departmental budget and partly the concerned executive officer may 
from the budget for Civil works as do so on his own judgement and 
mentioned above. responsibility. Simultaneously, he 

Rule 135 (1) General Rules. Subject to the should initiate action to obtain 
observance of these general rules, approval from the competent 
(including Rule 144) the initiation, authority and also to intimate the 
authorization and execution of works concerned Accounts Officer. 
allotted to a particular Ministry or Rule 136 (3) Any development of a project 
Department shall be regulated by considered necessary while a work is 
detailed rules and orders contained in in progress, which is not contingent 
the respective departmental on the execution of work as first 
regulations and by other special sanctioned, shall have to be covered 
orders applicable to them. by a supplementary estimate. 

Rule 135 (2) Ministry or Department shall put Rule 137 For purpose of approval and 
in place, as far as possible, sanctions, a group of works which 
empowered project teams for all forms one project, shall be 
large value projects and these teams considered as one work. The 
should be tasked only with project necessity for obtaining approval or 
execution and not given other sanction of higher authority to a 
operational duties. project which consists of such a 

Rule 136 (1) No works shall be commenced or group of work should not be avoided 
liability incurred in connection with it because of the fact that the cost of 
until: each particular work in the project is 

(i) administrative approval has within the powers of such approval 
been obtained from the or sanction of a lower authority. This 
appropriate authority in each provision, however, shall not apply in 
case. case of works of similar nature which 

(ii) sanction to incur expenditure are independent of each other. 
has been obtained from the Rule 138 Any anticipated or actual savings 
competent authority. from a sanctioned estimate for a 

(iii) a properly detailed design has definite project, shall not, without 
been sanctioned; while special authority, be applied to carry 
designing the projects etc, out additional work not 
principles of Life Cycle cost may contemplated in the original project. 
also be considered. Rule 139 Procedure for Execution of 

(iv) estimates containing the Works. The broad procedure to be 
detailed specifications and followed by a Ministry or Department 
quantities of various items have for execution of works under its own 
been prepared on the basis of arrangements shall be as under :- 
the Schedule of Rates ( i)  the detailed procedure relating 
maintained by CPWD or other to expenditure on such works 
Public Works Organisations and shall be prescribed by 
sanctioned. departmental regulations 

(v) funds to cover the charge framed in consultation with the 
during the year have been Accounts Officer, generally 
provided by competent based on the procedures and the 
authority. principles underlying the 

 
conducting post-graduate/ doctoral level courses or 
research, under any Ministry/ Department.  

 31 



financial and accounting rules costing Rs. 100 crore or above is 
prescribed for similar works approved, the Administrative 
carried out by the Central Public Ministry or Department will set up a 
Works Department (CPWD); Review Committee consisting of a 

( i i)  preparation of detailed design representative each from the 
and estimates shall precede any Administrative Ministry, Finance 
sanction for works; (Internal Finance Wing) and the 

( i i i)  no work shall be undertaken Executing Agency to review the 
before Issue of Administrative progress of the work. The Review 
Approval and Expenditure Committee shall have the powers to 
Sanction by the competent accept variation within 10% of the 
Authority on the basis of approved estimates. For works 
estimates framed; costing less than Rs. 100 crore, it will 

( iv)  Open tenders will be called for be at the discretion of the 
works costing [Rs. Ten lakh to Administrative Ministry/Department 
Rs. Sixty lakh]7; to set up a suitable mechanism for 

(v)  limited tenders will be called for review and acceptance of variation 
works costing less than [Rupees within 10% of the approved 
Ten lakhs]8; estimates. 

(vi)  execution of Contract 
Agreement or Award of work 
should be done before 
commencement of the work; 

(vii)  final payment for work shall be 
made only on the Personal 
Certificate of the Officer-in-
charge of execution of the work 
in the format given below: 

"I   Executing Officer of (Name of 
the Work), am personally 
satisfied that the work has been 
executed as per the specifications 
laid down in the Contract 
Agreement and the workmanship 
is up to the standards followed in 
the Industry." 

Rule 140 For original/minor works and repair 
works entrusted as per Rule 133(2) 
or Rule 133(3), the Administrative 
Approval and Expenditure Sanction 
shall be accorded and funds allotted 
by the concerned authority under 
these rules and in accordance with 
the Delegation of Financial Power 
Rules. The Public Works 
Organisation or the Public Sector 
Undertaking or any Organisation 
allotted work shall then execute the 
work entrusted to it in accordance 
with the rules and procedures 
prescribed in that organisation. A 
Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) may be drawn with Public 
Works Organisation or the Public 
Sector Undertaking for proper 
execution of work. 

Rule 141 Review of Projects. After a project 
 

7 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 8 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 

 32 



Ch. -6 - PROCUREMENT OF GOODS :- 

AND SERVICES (i) The description of the subject 
matter of procurement to the 

 
PROCUREMENT OF GOODS extent practicable should - 

Rule 142 This chapter contains the general a. be objective, functional, 

rules applicable to all Ministries or generic and measurable and 

Departments, regarding specify technical, qualitative 
and performance 

procurement of goods required for 
use in the public service. Detailed characteristics. 

instructions relating to procurement b. not indicate a requirement 

of goods may be issued by the for a particular trade mark, 

procuring departments broadly in trade name or brand. 
(ii) the specifications in terms of 

conformity with the general rules 
contained in this Chapter. quality, type etc., as also 

quantity of goods to be 
Rule 143 Definition of Goods. The term 

'goods' used in this chapter includes procured, should be clearly 

all articles, material, commodity, spelt out keeping in view the 

livestock, furniture, fixtures, raw specific needs of the procuring 

material, spares, instruments, organisations. The 
specifications so worked out 

machinery, equipment, industrial 
plant, vehicles, aircraft, ships, should meet the basic needs of 

medicines, railway rolling stock, the organisation without 

assemblies, subassemblies, including superfluous and non-

accessories, a group of machineries essential features, which may 
result in unwarranted 

comprising of an integrated 
production process or such other expenditure. 

(iii) Where applicable, the technical 
category of goods or intangible 
products like software, technology specifications shall, to the 

transfer, licenses, patents or other extent practicable, be based on 

intellectual properties purchased or the national technical 

otherwise acquired for the use of regulations or recognized 
national standards or building 

Government but excludes books, 
publications, periodicals, etc. for a codes, wherever such standards 

library. exist, and in their absence, be 

The term 'goods' also includes works based on the relevant 

and services which are incidental or international standards. In case 
of Government of India funded 

consequential to the supply of such 
goods, such as, transportation, projects abroad, the technical 

insurance, installation, specifications may be framed 

commissioning, training and based on requirements and 

maintenance. standards of the host 
beneficiary Government, where 

Rule 144 Fundamental principles of 
public buying (for all such standards exist. 

Provided that a procuring entity 
procurements including 
procurement of works). Every may, for reasons to be recorded 

authority delegated with the in writing, adopt any other 

financial powers of procuring goods technical specification. 

in public interest shall have the (iv) Care should also be taken to 
avoid purchasing quantities in 

responsibility and accountability to 
bring efficiency, economy, and excess of requirement to avoid 

transparency in matters relating to inventory carrying costs. 

public procurement and for fair and (v) offers should be invited 

equitable treatment of suppliers and following a fair, transparent and 
reasonable procedure. 

promotion of competition in public 
procurement. (vi) the procuring authority should 

be satisfied that the selected 
The procedure to be followed in 
making public procurement must offer adequately meets the 

conform to the following yardsticks requirement in all respects. 
(vii) the procuring authority should 

 

 33 



satisfy itself that the price of the goods. [The Ministries or 
selected offer is reasonable and Departments have been delegated 
consistent with the quality full powers to make their own 
required. arrangements for procurement of 

(viii) a complete schedule of goods and services, that are not 
procurement cycle from date of available on GeM. Common use 
issuing the tender to date of Goods and Services available on GeM 
issuing the contract should be are required to be procured 
published when the tender is mandatorily through GeM as per Rule 
issued. 149.]10 

(ix) All Ministries/Departments shall Rule 148 Deleted11 
prepare Annual Procurement Rule 149. Government e-Market place 
Plan before the commencement (GeM). Government of India has established 
of the year and the same should the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) for 
also be placed on their website. common use Goods and Services. GeM SPV will 

(x) [Notwithstanding anything ensure adequate publicity including periodic 
contained in these Rules, advertisement of the items to be procured 
Department of Expenditure through GeM for the prospective suppliers. The 
may, by order in writing, impose Procurement of Goods and Services by Ministries 
restrictions, including prior or Departments will be mandatory for Goods or 
registration and/ or screening, Services available on GeM. The credentials of 
on procurement from bidders suppliers on GeM shall be certified by GeM SPV. 
from, or bidders having The procuring authorities will certify the 
commercial arrangements with reasonability of rates. The GeM portal shall be 
an entity from, a country or utilized by the Government buyers for direct on-
countries, or a class of line purchases as under: 
countries, on grounds of (i) Up to [Rs.50,000/-]12 through any of the 
defence of India, or matters available suppliers on the GeM, meeting 
directly or indirectly related the requisite quality, specification and 
thereto including national delivery period. 
security; no procurement shall Note: In case of automobiles, 
be made in violation of such procurement under this sub-rule is 
restrictions.]9 permitted without any ceiling limit. 

Rule 145 Authorities competent to (ii) Above [Rs.50,000/- and up to 
purchase goods. An authority Rs.10,00,000/-]13 through the GeM 
which is competent to incur Seller having lowest price amongst the 
expenditure may sanction the available sellers of at least three 
purchase of goods required for use in different manufacturers, on GeM, 
public service in accordance with meeting the requisite quality, 
provisions in the Delegation of specification and delivery period. The 
Financial Powers Rules, following the tools for online bidding and online 
general procedure contained in the reverse auction available on GeM can be 
following rules. used by the Buyer even for 

Rule 146 Procurement of goods required procurements less than [Rs 
on mobilisation Procurement of 10,00,000]14. 
goods required on mobilisation and/ (iii) Above [Rs.10,00,000/-]15 through the 
or during the continuance of Military supplier having lowest price meeting the 
operations shall be regulated by requisite quality, specification and 
special rules and orders issued by the delivery period after mandatorily 
Government on this behalf from time obtaining bids, using online bidding or 
to time. reverse auction tool provided on GeM. 

Rule 147 Powers for procurement of (iv) The invitation for the online e-

 
9 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.7/10/2021-PPD dated 13 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
23.02.2023. of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 
10 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 14 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
02.04.2019. of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 
11 Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 15 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
02.04.2019. 
12 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 

 34 



bidding/reverse auction will be available before registration. 
to all the existing Sellers or other Sellers ( i i i )  The supplier(s) will be registered for a 
registered on the portal and who have fixed period (between 1 to 3 years) 
offered their goods/services under the depending on the nature of the goods. 
particular product/service category, as At the end of this period, the registered 
per terms and conditions of GeM. supplier(s) willing to continue with 

(v) The above mentioned monetary ceiling registration are to apply afresh for 
is applicable only for purchases made renewal of registration. New supplier(s) 
through GeM. For purchases, if any, may also be considered for registration 
outside GeM, relevant GFR Rules shall at anytime, provided they fulfill all the 
apply. required conditions. 

(vi) The Ministries/Departments shall work ( i v )  Performance and conduct of every 
out their procurement requirements of registered supplier is to be watched by 
Goods and Services on either "OPEX" the concerned Ministry or Department. 
model or "CAPEX" model as per their The registered supplier(s) are liable to 
requirement/ suitability at the time of be removed from the list of approved 
preparation of Budget Estimates (BE) suppliers if they fail to abide by the 
and shall project their Annual terms and conditions of the registration 
Procurement Plan of goods and services or fail to supply the goods on time or 
on GeM portal within 30 days of Budget supply substandard goods or make any 
approval. false declaration to any Government 

(vii) The Government Buyers may ascertain agency or for any ground which, in the 
the reasonableness of prices before opinion of the Government, is not in 
placement of order using the Business public interest. 
Analytics (BA) tools available on GeM ( v )  [The list of registered suppliers for the 
including the Last Purchase Price on subject matter of procurement be 
GeM, Department's own Last Purchase exhibited on websites of the Procuring 
Price etc. Entity/ their e-Procurement portals.]17 

(viii) A demand for goods shall not be divided Rule 151 Debarment from bidding. 
into small quantities to make piecemeal (i) A bidder shall be debarred if he has 
purchases to avoid procurement been convicted of an offence— 
through L-1 Buying / bidding / reverse ( a )  under the Prevention of 
auction on GeM or the necessity of Corruption Act, 1988; or 
obtaining the sanction of higher ( b )  the Indian Penal Code or any other 
authorities required with reference to law for the time being in force, for 
the estimated value of the total causing any loss of life or property 
demand. or causing a threat to public health 

Rule 150 Registration of Suppliers as part of execution of a public 
( i )  [For goods and services not available on procurement contract. 

GeM, Head of Ministry/ Department may (ii) A bidder debarred under sub-section 
also register suppliers of goods and (i) or any successor of the bidder shall 
services which are specifically required not be eligible to participate in a 
by that Department or Office, procurement process of any 
periodically. Registration of the supplier procuring entity for a period not 
should be done following a fair, exceeding three years commencing 
transparent and reasonable procedure from the date of debarment. 
and after giving due publicity. Such Department of Expenditure (DoE) will 
registered suppliers should be boarded maintain such list which will also be 
on GeM as and when the item or service displayed on the Central Public 
gets listed on GeM.]16 Procurement Portal.18 

( i i )  Credentials, manufacturing capability, (iii) A procuring entity may debar a bidder 
quality control systems, past or any of its successors, from 
performance, after-sales service, participating in any procurement 
financial background etc. of the process undertaken by it, for a period 
supplier(s) should be carefully verified not exceeding two years, if it 

 
16 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 18 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/20/2018-PPD dated 
02.04.2019. 02.11.2021. 
17 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 
02.04.2019. 

 35 



determines that the bidder has Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
breached the code of integrity. The have notified procurement 
Ministry/Department will maintain policy under section 11 of the 
such list which will also be displayed Micro, Small and Medium 
on their website. Enterprises Development Ad, 

( iv)  The bidder shall not be debarred unless 2006. 
such bidder has been given a (iii) The Central Government may, 
reasonable opportunity to represent by notification, provide for 
against such debarment mandatory procurement of any 

Rule 152 Enlistment of Indian Agents: goods or services from any 
[Ministries / Departments if they so category of bidders, or provide 
require, may enlist Indian agents, for preference to bidders on the 
who desire to quote directly on grounds of promotion of locally 
behalf of their foreign principals.]19 manufactured goods or locally 

Ru1e 153 Reserved Items and other provided services. 
Purchase/ Price Preference Rule 154 Purchase of goods without 
Policy. quotation 
(i) [The Central Government, Purchase of goods upto the value of 

through administrative [Rs. 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand) 
instructions, has reserved all only]21 on each occasion may be 
items of hand spun and hand- made without inviting quotations or 
woven textiles (khadi goods) for bids on the basis of a certificate to 
exclusive purchase from Khadi be recorded by the competent 
Village Industries commission authority in the following format. 
(KVIC). Of all items of textiles "I„ am personally satisfied that these 
required by Central goods purchased are of the requisite 
Government departments, it quality and specification and have 
shall be mandatory to make been purchased from a reliable 
procurement of at least 20% supplier at a reasonable price." 
from amongst items of Rule 155 Purchase of goods by Purchase 
handloom origin, for exclusive Committee. [In case a certain item 
purchase from KVIC and/ or is not available on the GeM portal,]22 
Handloom Clusters such as Co- Purchase of goods costing above 
Operative Societies, Self Help [Rs.50,000 (Rupees Fifty thousand 
Group (SHG) Federations, Joint only) and upto Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees 
Liability Group (JLG), Producer Five lakh only)]23 on each occasion 
Companies (PC), Corporations may be made on the 
etc. including Weavers having recommendations of a duly 
Pehchan Cards.]20 constituted Local Purchase 

(ii) Ministry of Micro, Small and Committee consisting of three 

 
19 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.26/2/2016-PPD dated 6/1/2018-PPD dated 19.01.2018. 
25.07.2017. 22 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1.26/2018-PPD dated 
20 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.10/2/2019-PPD(Pt.) dated 02.04.2019. 
17.02.2020. 23 Replace with purchase of goods costing above Rs. 
21 Replace with purchase of goods upto the value of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh) and upto Rs. 10,00,000/- 
1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh) only on each occasion in case (Rupees ten lakh) in case of Scientific Ministries/ 
of Scientific Ministries/ Departments/ Organization of Departments/ Organization of Government of India which 
Government of India which are Department of Science and are Department of Science and Technology, Department of 
Technology, Department of Bio-technology, Department of Bio-technology, Department of Scientific & Industrial 
Scientific & Industrial Research, Department of Atomic Research, Department of Atomic Energy, Department of 
Energy, Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Defence Research and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Indian Development Organisation, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), including its Research (ICAR), including its affiliated institutions and 
affiliated institutions and Universities, Department of Health Universities, Department of Health Research (DHR), 
Research (DHR), including Indian Council of Medical including Indian Council of Medical Research, Educational 
Research, Educational and Research Institutes conducting and Research Institutes conducting post-graduate/ doctoral 
post-graduate/ doctoral level courses or research, under any level courses or research, under any Ministry/ Department, 
Ministry/ Department, notified vide Department of notified vide Department of Expenditure OM No. 
Expenditure OM No. F.20/42/2021-PPD dated 20.05.2024. F.20/42/2021-PPD dated 20.05.2024. Note: These powers 
Note: These powers can be used for procurement of any are to be used only when the required goods are not 
item. Further, these powers are to be used only when the available on Government e-Marketplace (GeM) as stipulated 
required goods are not available on Government e- in this Department OM No. 6/1/2018-PPD dated 19.01.2018. 
Marketplace (GeM) as stipulated in this Department OM No. 

 36 



members of an appropriate level as confidentiality is required, for 
decided by the Head of the reasons of national security, 
Department. The committee will would be exempted from the 
survey the market to ascertain the mandatory e-publishing 
reasonableness of rate, quality and requirement. The decision to 
specifications and identify the exempt any case on the said 
appropriate supplier. Before grounds should be approved by 
recommending placement of the the Secretary of the Ministry/ 
purchase order, the members of the Department with the 
committee will jointly record a concurrence of the concerned 
certificate as under: Financial Advisor. In the case of 
"Certified that we, members of the Autonomous Bodies and 
purchase committee are jointly and Statutory Bodies' approval of 
individually satisfied that the goods the Head of the Body with the 
recommended for purchase are of the concurrence of the Head of the 
requisite specification and quality, Finance should be obtained in 
priced at the prevailing market rate each such case. Statistical 
and the supplier recommended is information on the number of 
reliable and competent to supply the cases in which exemption was 
goods in question, and it is not granted and the value of the 
debarred by Department of concerned contract should be 
Expenditure24 or Ministry/ intimated on a Quarterly basis 
Department concerned." to the Ministry of Finance, 

Rule 156 Deleted.25 Department of Expenditure. 
Rule 157 A demand for goods should not be ( i i i)  The above instructions apply to 

divided into small quantities to make all Tender Enquiries, Requests 
piecemeal purchases to avoid the for Proposals, Requests for 
necessity of obtaining the sanction of Expressions of Interest, Notice 
higher authority required with for pre-Qualification/ 
reference to the estimated value of Registration or any other notice 
the total demand inviting bids or proposals in any 

Rule 158 Purchase of goods by obtaining form whether they are 
bids. Except in cases covered under advertised, issued to limited 
Rule 154 and 155, Ministries or number of parties or to a single 
Departments shall procure goods party. 
under the powers referred to in Rule ( iv) Deleted.26  
140 above by following the standard (v) These instructions would not 
method of obtaining bids in: apply to procurements made in 
( i )  Advertised Tender Enquiry terms of provisions of Rules 154 
( i i )  Limited Tender Enquiry (Purchase of goods without 
( i i i )  Two-Stage Bidding quotations) or 155 (Purchase of 
( i v )  Single Tender Enquiry goods by purchase committee) 
( v )  Electronic Reverse Auctions of General Financial Rules. 

Rule 159 E-Publishing Rule 160 E -Procurement 
( i) It is mandatory for all Ministries/ (i) It is mandatory for Ministries/ 

Departments of the Central Departments to receive all bids 
Government, their attached and through e-procurement portals 
Subordinate Offices and in respect of all procurements. 
Autonomous /Statutory Bodies (ii) Ministries/ Departments which 
to publish their tender do not have a large volume of 
enquiries, corrigenda thereon procurement or carry out 
and details of bid awards on the procurements required only for 
Central Public Procurement day-to-day running of offices 
Portal (CPPP). and also have not initiated e-

( i i) Individual cases where procurement through any other 

 
24 26

Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/20/2018-PPD dated  Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 
02.11.2021. 02.04.2019. 
25 Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 
02.04.2019. 

 37 



solution provided so far, may goods of the required 
use e-procurement solution quality, specifications etc., 
developed by NIC. Other may not be available in the 
Ministries/ Departments may country and it is necessary 
either use e-procurement to also look for suitable 
solution developed by NIC or competitive offers from 
engage any other service abroad, the Ministry or 
provider following due process.  Department may send 

(iii) Deleted.27 copies of the tender notice 
(iv) In individual case where to the Indian Embassies 

national security and strategic abroad as well as to the 
considerations demands Foreign Embassies in India. 
confidentiality, Ministries/ The selection of embassies 
Departments may exempt such will depend on the 
cases from e-procurement after possibility of availability of 
seeking approval of concerned the required goods in such 
Secretary and with concurrence countries. In such cases e-
of Financial Advisers. procurement as per Rule 

(v) In case of tenders floated by 160 may not be insisted. 
Indian Missions Abroad, (b) No Global Tender Enquiry 
Competent Authority to decide (GTE), however shall be 
the tender, may exempt such invited for tenders up to Rs 
case from e-procurement. 200 crore or such limit as 

Rule 161 Advertised Tender Enquiry may be prescribed by the 
(i) Subject to exceptions Department of Expenditure 

incorporated under Rule 154, from time to time. Provided 
155, 162 and 166, invitation to that for tenders below such 
tenders by advertisement limit, in exceptional cases, 
should be used for procurement where the Ministry or 
of goods of estimated value of Department feels that 
[Rs. 50 lakhs (Rupees Fifty there are special reasons 
Lakh)28 and above. for GTE, it may record its 
Advertisement in such cases detailed justification and 
should be given on GeM as well seek prior approval for 
as on GeM- Central Public relaxation to the above rule 
Procurement Portal (CPPP). An from the Competent 
organisation having its own Authority specified by the 
website should also publish all Department of 
its advertised tender enquiries Expenditure.]29 
on the website. (v) In order to promote wider 

(ii) The organisation should also participation and ease of 
post the complete bidding bidding, no cost of tender 
document in its website and on document may be charged for 
CPPP to enable prospective the tender documents 
bidders to make use of the downloaded by the bidders. 
document by downloading from (vi) Ordinarily, the minimum time to 
the web site. be allowed for submission of 

(iii) The advertisements for bids should be three weeks from 
invitation of tenders should give the date of publication of the 
the complete web address from tender notice or availability of 
where the bidding documents the bidding document for sale, 
can be downloaded. whichever is later. Where the 

(iv) [Global Tender Enquiry (GTE): Department also contemplates 
(a) Where the Ministry or obtaining bids from abroad, the 

Department feels that the minimum period should be kept 

 
27 Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated  
02.04.2019. 29 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.12/17/2019-PPD dated 
28 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 15.05.2020. 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

 38 



as four weeks for both domestic why the procurement could 
and foreign bidders. not be anticipated. 

Rule 162 Limited Tender Enquiry (b) There are sufficient 
(i) This method may be adopted reasons, to be recorded in 

when estimated value of the writing by the competent 
goods to be procured is up to authority, indicating that it 
[Rupees Fifty Lakhs]30. Copies will not be in public interest 
of the bidding document should to procure the goods 
be sent directly by speed through advertised tender 
post/registered post/courier/ e- enquiry. 
mail to firms which are borne on (c) The sources of supply are 
the list of registered suppliers definitely known and 
for the goods in question as possibility of fresh 
referred under Rule 150 above. source(s) beyond those 
The number of supplier firms in being tapped is remote. 
Limited Tender Enquiry should (iv)  Sufficient time should be 
be more than three. Efforts allowed for submission of bids in 
should be made to identify a Limited Tender Enquiry cases. 
higher number of approved Rule 163 Two bid system (simultaneous 
suppliers to obtain more receipt of separate technical and 
responsive bids on competitive financial bids): For purchasing high 
basis. value plant, machinery etc. of a 
Further, an organisation should complex and technical nature, bids 
publish its limited tender may be obtained in two parts 
enquiries on [GeM as well as on asunder: 
GeM- Central Public (i) Technical bid consisting of all 
Procurement Portal (CPPP). An technical details along with 
organisation having its own commercial terms and 
website should also publish all conditions; and 
its advertised tender enquiries (ii) Financial bid indicating item-
on the website]31. wise price for the items 

(ii) The unsolicited bids should not mentioned in the technical 
be accepted. However, bid. 
Ministries/ Departments should The technical bid and the financial bid 
evolve a system by which should be sealed by the bidder in 
interested firms can register separate covers duly super-scribed 
and bid in next round of and both these sealed covers are to 
tendering. be put in a bigger cover which should 

(iii) Purchase through Limited also be sealed and duly super-
Tender Enquiry may be adopted scribed. The technical bids are to be 
even where the estimated value opened by the purchasing Ministry or 
of the procurement is more than Department at the first instance and 
[Rupees Fifty Lakhs]32, in the evaluated by a competent committee 
following circumstances. or authority. At the second stage 
(a) The competent authority in financial bids of only these technically 

the Ministry or Department acceptable offers should be opened 
certifies that the demand is after intimating them the date and 
urgent and any additional time of opening the financial bid for 
expenditure involved by further evaluation and ranking before 
not procuring through awarding the contract. 
advertised tender enquiry Rule 164 Two-Stage Bidding (Obtain bids in 
is justified in view of two stages with receipt of financial 
urgency. The Ministry or bids after receipt and evaluation of 
Department should also technical bids) 
put on record the nature of (i) Ministry/Department may 
the urgency and reasons procure the subject matter of 

 
30 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

32
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024  Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
31 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

 39 



procurement by the method of bidders and if any such 
two-stage bidding, if discussion is held, equal 
(a)  it is not feasible to opportunity shall be given 

formulate detailed to all bidders to participate 
specifications or identify in the discussions; 
specific characteristics for (d) in revising the relevant 
the subject matter of terms and conditions of the 
procurement, without procurement, the 
receiving inputs regarding procuring entity shall not 
its technical aspects from modify the fundamental 
bidders; or nature of the procurement 

(b)  the character of the itself, but may add, amend 
subject matter of or omit any specification of 
procurement is subject to the subject matter of 
rapid technological procurement or criterion 
advances or market for evaluation; 
fluctuations or both; or (e) in the second stage of the 

(c)  Ministry/Department seeks bidding process, the 
to enter into a contract for procuring entity shall invite 
the purpose of research, bids from all those bidders 
experiment, study or whose bids at the first 
development, except stage were not rejected, to 
where the contract present final bid with bid 
includes the production of prices in response to a 
items in quantities revised set of terms and 
sufficient to establish their conditions of the 
commercial viability or to procurement; 
recover research and (f) any bidder, invited to bid 
development costs; or but not in a position to 

(d)  The bidder is expected to supply the subject matter 
carry out a detailed survey of procurement due to 
or investigation and modification in the 
undertake a specifications or terms and 
comprehensive conditions, may withdraw 
assessment of risks, costs from the bidding 
and obligations associated proceedings without 
with the particular forfeiting any bid security 
procurement. that he may have been 

(ii) The procedure for two stage required to provide or 
bidding shall include the being penalised in any 
following, namely: way, by declaring his 
(a) in the first stage of the intention to withdraw from 

bidding process, the the procurement 
Ministry/Department shall proceedings with adequate 
invite bids through justification. 
advertised tender Rule 165 Late Bids. In the case of advertised 
containing the technical tender enquiry or limited tender 
aspects and contractual enquiry, late bids (i.e. bids received 
terms and conditions of the after the specified date and time for 
proposed procurement receipt of bids) should not be 
without a bid price; considered. 

(b) all first stage bids, which Rule 166 Single Tender Enquiry. 
are otherwise eligible, shall Procurement from a single source 
be evaluated through an may be resorted to in the following 
appropriate committee circumstances: 
constituted by the Ministry/ (i) It is in the knowledge of the 
Department; user department that only a 

(c) the committee may hold particular firm is the 
discussions with the manufacturer of the required 

 40 



goods. to participate in the 
(ii) In a case of emergency, the electronic reverse auction, 

required goods are necessarily so that effective 
to be purchased from a competition is ensured; 
particular source and the (c) The criteria to be used by 
reason for such decision is to be the procuring entity in 
recorded and approval of determining the successful 
competent authority obtained. bid are quantifiable and 

(iii) For standardization of can be expressed in 
machinery or spare parts to be monetary terms; and 
compatible to the existing sets (iii) The procedure for electronic 
of equipment (on the advice of reverse auction shall include the 
a competent technical expert following, namely: 
and approved by the competent (a) The procuring entity shall 
authority), the required item is solicit bids through an 
to be purchased only from a invitation to the electronic 
selected firm reverse auction to be 

Note: Proprietary Article Certificate in the published or 
following form is to be provided by the communicated in 
Ministry/ Department before procuring the accordance with the 
goods from a single source under the provisions similar to e-
provision of sub-Rule 166 (i) and 166 (iii) as procurement; and 
applicable. (b) The invitation shall, in 
(i) The indented goods are manufactured addition to the information 

by M/s ……………………….. as specified in e-
(ii) No other make or model is acceptable procurement, include 

for the following reasons: details relating to access to 
……………………………………………… and registration for the 

(iii) Concurrence of finance wing to the auction, opening and 
proposal vide: closing of the auction and 
……………………………………….. Norms for conduct of the 

(iv) Approval of the competent authority auction. 
vide: Rule 168 Contents of Bidding Document 

(Signature with date and All the terms, conditions, stipulations 
designation of the indenting and information to be incorporated in 
officer) the bidding document are to be 

Rule 167 Electronic Reverse Auction shown in the appropriate chapters as 
(i) Electronic Reverse Auction below: 

means an online real-time Chapter-1: Instructions to Bidders. 
purchasing technique utilised by Chapter-2: Conditions of Contract.  
the procuring entity to select Chapter-3: Schedule of 
the successful bid, which Requirements. 
involves presentation by bidders Chapter-4: Specifications and 
of successively more favourable allied Technical Details. 
bids during a scheduled period Chapter-5: Price Schedule (to be 
of time and automatic utilised by the bidders for quoting 
evaluation of bids; their prices). 

(ii) A procuring entity may choose Chapter-6: Contract Form. 
to procure a subject matter of Chapter-7: Other Standard Forms, if 
procurement by the electronic any, to be utilised by the purchaser 
reverse auction method, if: and the bidders. 
(a) It is feasible for the Rule 169 Maintenance Contract. 

procuring entity to Depending on the cost and nature of 
formulate a detailed the goods to be purchased, it may 
description of the subject also be necessary to enter into 
matter of the procurement; maintenance contract(s) of suitable 

(b) There is a competitive period either with the supplier of the 
market of bidders goods or with any other competent 
anticipated to be qualified firm, not necessarily the supplier of 

 41 



the subject goods. Such purchaser's interest in all 
maintenance contracts are especially respects. The bid security is 
needed for sophisticated and costly normally to remain valid for a 
equipment and machinery. It may, period of forty-five days beyond 
however, be kept in mind that the the final bid validity period. 
equipment or machinery is (ii)  Bid securities of the 
maintained free of charge by the unsuccessful bidders should be 
supplier during its warranty period or returned to them at the earliest 
such other extended periods as the after expiry of the final bid 
contract terms may provide and the validity and latest on or before 
paid maintenance should commence the 30th day after the award of 
only thereafter. the contract. 

Rule 170 Bid Security [However, in case of two packet 
(i)  To safeguard against a bidder's or two stage bidding, Bid 

withdrawing or altering its bid securities of unsuccessful 
during the bid validity period in bidders during first stage i.e. 
the case of advertised or limited technical evaluation etc. should 
tender enquiry, Bid Security be returned within 30 days of 
(also known as Earnest Money) declaration of result of first 
is to be obtained from the stage i.e. technical evaluation 
bidders except Micro and Small etc.]36 
Enterprises (MSEs) as defined in (ii i)  In place of a Bid security, the 
MSE Procurement Policy issued Ministries/ Departments may 
by Department of Micro, Small require Bidders to sign a Bid 
and Medium Enterprises securing declaration accepting 
(MSME) or are registered with that if they withdraw or modify 
the Central Purchase their Bids during the period of 
Organisation or the concerned validity, or if they are awarded 
Ministry or Department [or the contract and they fail to sign 
Startups as recognized by the contract, or to submit a 
Department for Promotion of performance security before the 
Industry and Internal Trade deadline defined in the request 
(DPIIT)]33. The bidders should for bids document, they will be 
be asked to furnish bid security suspended for the period of 
along with their bids. Amount of time specified in the request for 
bid security should ordinarily bids document from being 
range between two percent to eligible to submit Bids for 
five percent of the estimated contracts with the entity that 
value of the goods to be invited the Bids. 
procured. The amount of bid Rule 171 Performance Security 
security should be determined ( i) To ensure due performance of 
accordingly by the Ministry or the contract, Performance 
Department and indicated in the Security is to be obtained from 
bidding documents. The bid the successful bidder awarded 
security may be accepted in the the contract. Unlike contracts of 
form of [Insurance Surety Works and Plants, in case of 
Bonds]34 Account Payee contracts for goods, the need 
Demand Draft, Fixed Deposit for the Performance Security 
Receipt, Banker's Cheque or depends on the market 
Bank Guarantee [including e- conditions and commercial 
Bank Guarantee]35 from any of practice for the particular kind 
the Commercial Banks or of goods. Performance Security, 
payment online in an acceptable [in respect of procurement only 
form, safeguarding the of Goods/ Consultancy Services/ 

 
33 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.20/2/2014-PPD(Pt.) dated 05.08.2022. 
25.07.2017. 36 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1/2/2022-PPD dated 
34 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1/1/2022-PPD dated 01.04.2022. 
02.02.2022. 
35 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1/4/2022-PPD dated 

 42 



Non Consultancy Services, Undertaking; or 
should be for an amount of (c) in case of maintenance 
three to five per cent (3-5%)]37. contract, the amount should 
of the value of the contract as not exceed the amount 
specified in the bid documents. payable for six months 
Performance Security may be under the contract. 
furnished in the form of Ministries or Departments of 
[Insurance Surety Bond]38 the Central Government may 
Account Payee Demand Draft, relax, in consultation with 
Fixed Deposit Receipt from a their Financial Advisers 
Commercial bank, Bank concerned, the ceilings 
Guarantee [including e-Bank (including percentage laid 
Guarantee]39 from a down for advance payment 
Commercial bank or online for private firms) mentioned 
payment in an acceptable form above. While making any 
safeguarding the purchaser's advance payment as above, 
interest in all respects. adequate safeguards in the 

( i i) Performance Security should form of bank guarantee etc. 
remain valid for a period of sixty should be obtained from the 
days beyond the date of firm. 
completion of all contractual Rule 172 (2) Part payment to suppliers: 
obligations of the supplier Depending on the terms of delivery 
including warranty obligations. incorporated in a contract, part 

( i i i)  Bid security should be refunded payment to the supplier may be 
to the successful bidder on released after it dispatches the goods 
receipt of Performance Security. from its premises in terms of the 

Rule 172 (1) Advance payment to contract. 
supplier Rule 173 Transparency, competition, 

Ordinarily, payments for services fairness and elimination of 
rendered or supplies made should be arbitrariness in the procurement 
released only after the services have process All government purchases 
been rendered or supplies made. should be made in a transparent, 
However, it may become necessary competitive and fair manner, to 
to make advance payments for secure best value for money. This will 
example in the following types of also enable the prospective bidders to 
cases: formulate and send their competitive 
(i) Advance payment demanded by bids with confidence. Some of the 

firms holding maintenance measures for ensuring the above are 
contracts for servicing of Air- as follows:- 
conditioners, computers, other (i) the text of the bidding 
costly equipment, etc. document should be self-

(ii) Advance payment demanded by contained and comprehensive 
firms against fabrication without any ambiguities. All 
contracts, turn-key contracts essential information, which a 
etc. bidder needs for sending 

Such advance payments should responsive bid, should be 
not exceed the following limits: clearly spelt out in the bidding 
(a) Thirty per cent. of the document in simple language. 

contract value to private The condition of prior turnover 
firms; and prior experience may be 

(b) Forty per cent. of the relaxed for Startups (as defined 
contract value to a State or by Department of Industrial 
Central Government agency Policy and Promotion) subject to 
or a Public Sector meeting of quality & technical 

 
37 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/2/2023-PPD dated 38 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1/1/2022-PPD dated 
01.01.2024 02.02.2022. 
Amount of performance security plus security deposit/ 39 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.1/4/2022-PPD dated 
retention money for procurement of works will continue to 05.08.2022. 
be 3% to 10%. 

 43 



specifications and making modification or clarification 
suitable provisions in the in the same manner as the 
bidding document. The bidding publication or 
document should contain, communication of the initial 
interalia. bidding document was 
(a) Description and made. 

Specifications of goods (b)  In case a clarification or 
including the nature, modification is issued to the 
quantity, time and place or bidding document, the 
places of delivery. procuring entity shall, before 

(b) the criteria for eligibility and the last date for submission 
qualifications to be met by of bids, extend such time 
the bidders such as limit, if, in its opinion more 
minimum level of time is required by bidders to 
experience, past take into account the 
performance, technical clarification or modification, 
capability, manufacturing as the case may be, while 
facilities and financial submitting their bids. 
position etc. or limitation for (c)  Any bidder who has 
participation of the bidders, submitted his bid in 
if any. response to the original 

(c) eligibility criteria for goods invitation shall have the 
indicating any legal opportunity to modify or re-
restrictions or conditions submit it, as the case may 
about the origin of goods be, or withdraw such bid in 
etc. which may be required case the modification to 
to be met by the successful bidding document materially 
bidder. affect the essential terms of 

(d) the procedure as well as the procurement, within the 
date, time and place for period initially allotted or 
sending the bids. such extended time as may 

(e) date, time and place of be allowed for submission of 
opening of the bid. bids, after the modifications 

(f) Criteria for evaluation of bids are made to the bidding 
(g) special terms affecting document by the procuring 

performance, if any. entity: 
(h) Essential terms of the Provided that the bid last 

procurement contract. submitted or the bid as 
(i) Bidding Documents should modified by the bidder shall 

include a clause that "if a be considered for evaluation 
firm quotes NIL charges/ (iv) Suitable provision should be 
consideration, the bid shall kept in the bidding document to 
be treated as unresponsive enable a bidder to question the 
and will not be considered". bidding conditions, bidding 

(ii) Any other information which the process and/ or rejection of its 
procuring entity considers bid. The reasons for rejecting a 
necessary for the bidders to tender or non-issuing a tender 
submit their bids. document to a prospective 

(iii) Modification to bidding bidder must be disclosed where 
document: enquiries are made by the 

(a)  In case any bidder. 
modification is made to the (v) Suitable provision for 
bidding document or any settlement of disputes, if any, 
clarification is issued which emanating from the resultant 
materially affects the terms contract, should be kept in the 
contained in the bidding bidding document. 
document, the procuring (vi) The bidding document should 
entity shall publish or indicate clearly that the 
communicate such resultant contract will be 

 44 



interpreted under Indian Laws. ( d )  price. 
(vii) The bidders should be given ( e )  cost of operating, 

reasonable time to prepare and maintaining and repairing 
send their bids. etc. 

(viii) The bids should be opened in (xii) Bids received should be 
public and authorised evaluated in terms of the 
representatives of the bidders conditions already incorporated 
should be permitted to attend in the bidding documents; No 
the bid opening. new condition which was not 

(ix) The specifications of the incorporated in the bidding 
required goods should be documents should be brought in 
clearly stated without any for evaluation of the bids. 
ambiguity so that the Determination of a bid's 
prospective bidders can send responsiveness should be based 
meaningful bids. In order to on the contents of the bid itself 
attract sufficient number of without recourse to extrinsic 
bidders, the specification should evidence. 
be broad based to the extent (xiii) Bidders should not be permitted 
feasible to alter or modify their bids after 

(x) Pre-bid conference: In case of expiry of the deadline for receipt 
turn- key contract(s) or of bids. 
contract(s) of special nature for (xiv) Negotiation with bidders after 
procurement of sophisticated bid opening must be severely 
and costly equipment or discouraged. However, in 
wherever felt necessary, a exceptional circumstances 
suitable provision is to be kept where price negotiation against 
in the bidding documents for an ad-hoc procurement is 
one or more rounds of pre-bid necessary due to some 
conference for clarifying issues unavoidable circumstances, the 
and clearing doubts, if any, same may be resorted to only 
about the specifications and with the lowest evaluated 
other allied technical details of responsive bidder. 
the plant, equipment and (xv) Deleted.40 
machinery etc. projected in the (xvi) Contract should ordinarily be 
bidding document. The date, awarded to the lowest 
time and place of pre-bid evaluated bidder whose bid has 
conference should be indicated been found to be responsive 
in the bidding document. This and who is eligible and qualified 
date should be sufficiently to perform the contract 
ahead of bid opening date. The satisfactorily as per the terms 
records of such conference shall and conditions incorporated in 
be intimated to all bidders and, the corresponding bidding 
shall also be exhibited on the document. However, where the 
website(s) where tender was lowest acceptable bidder 
published. against ad-hoc requirement is 

(xi) Criteria for determining not in a position to supply the 
responsiveness are to be taken full quantity required, the 
into account for evaluating the remaining quantity, as far as 
bids such as: possible, be ordered from the 
( a )  time of delivery. next higher responsive bidder at 
( b )  Performance/ efficiency/ the rates offered by the lowest 

environmental responsive bidder. 
characteristics. (xvii) Procurement of Energy Efficient 

( c )  the terms of payment and Electrical Appliances: Ministries/ 
of guarantees in respect of Departments while procuring 
the subject matter of electrical appliances notified by 
procurement Department of Expenditure 

 
40 Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated   
02.04.2019. 

 45 



shall ensure that they carry the Committee should be reporting 
notified threshold or higher Star directly to any other member of 
Rating of Bureau of Energy such Committee in case 
Efficiency (BEE). estimated value of procurement 

(xviii) The name of the successful exceeds [Rs. 50 lakhs]41. 
bidder awarded the contract Rule 174 Efficiency, Economy and 
should be mentioned in the Accountability in Public 
CPPP, Ministries or Departments Procurement System. Public 
website and their notice board procurement procedure should 
or bulletin. ensure efficiency, economy and 

(xix) Rejection of all Bids is justified accountability in the system. To 
when achieve the same, the following keys 
a. effective competition is areas should be addressed: 

lacking. (i) To reduce delay, appropriate 
b. all Bids and Proposals are time frame for each stage of 

not substantially procurement should be 
responsive to the prescribed by the Ministry or 
requirements of the Department. 
Procurement Documents. (ii) To minimise the time needed for 

c. the Bids'/Proposals' prices decision making and placement 
are substantially higher of contract, every 
that the updated cost Ministry/Department, with the 
estimate or available approval of the competent 
budget; or authority, may delegate, 

d. none of the technical wherever necessary, 
Proposals meets the appropriate purchasing powers 
minimum technical to the lower functionaries. 
qualifying score. (iii) The Ministries or Departments 

(xx) Lack of competition in rule should ensure placement of 
173(xix) shall not be contract within the original 
determined solely on the basis validity of the bids. Extension of 
of the number of Bidders. Even bid validity must be discouraged 
when only one Bid is submitted, and resorted to only in 
the process may be considered exceptional circumstances. 
valid provided following (iv) Deleted.42 
conditions are satisfied: Rule 175 (1) Code of Integrity 
a .  the procurement was No official of a procuring entity 

satisfactorily advertised or a bidder shall act in 
and sufficient time was contravention of the codes 
given for submission of which includes 
bids. (i) prohibition of 

b .  the qualification criteria (a)  making offer, solicitation or 
were not unduly acceptance of bribe, 
restrictive; and reward or gift or any 

c .  prices are reasonable in material benefit, either 
comparison to market directly or indirectly, in 
values exchange for an unfair 

(xxi) When a limited or open tender advantage in the 
results in only one effective procurement process or to 
offer, it shall be treated as a otherwise influence the 
single tender contract. procurement process. 

(xxii) In case a purchase Committee (b)  any omission, or 
is constituted to purchase or misrepresentation that 
recommend the procurement, may mislead or attempt to 
no member of the purchase mislead so that financial or 

 
41 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry  
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024  
42 Deleted vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated 
02.04.2019. 

 46 



other benefit may be department may trade the existing 
obtained or an obligation old item while purchasing the new 
avoided. one. For this purpose, a suitable 

(c)  any collusion, bid rigging or clause is to be incorporated in the 
anticompetitive behavior bidding document so that the 
that may impair the prospective and interested bidders 
transparency, fairness and formulate their bids accordingly. 
the progress of the Depending on the value and 
procurement process. condition of the old item to be 

(d)  improper use of traded, the time as well as the mode 
information provided by of handing over the old item to the 
the procuring entity to the successful bidder should be decided 
bidder with an intent to and relevant details in this regard 
gain unfair advantage in suitably incorporated in the bidding 
the procurement process document. Further, suitable 
or for personal gain. provision should also be kept in the 

(e)  any financial or business bidding document to enable the 
transactions between the purchaser either to trade or not to 
bidder and any official of trade the item while purchasing the 
the procuring entity related new one. 
to tender or execution PROCUREMENT OF SERVICES 
process of contract; which A. CONSULTING SERVICES 
can affect the decision of Rule 177 "Consulting Service means any 
the procuring entity subject matter of procurement 
directly or indirectly. (which as distinguished from 'Non- 

( f)  any coercion or any threat Consultancy Services' involves 
to impair or harm, directly primarily non-physical project-
or indirectly, any party or specific, intellectual and procedural 
its property to influence processes where outcomes/ 
the procurement process. deliverables would vary from one 

(g)  obstruction of any consultant to another), other than 
investigation or auditing of goods or works, except those 
a procurement process. incidental or consequential to the 

(h)  making false declaration or service, and includes professional, 
providing false information intellectual, training and advisory 
for participation in a tender services or any other service 
process or to secure a classified or declared as such by a 
contract; procuring entity but does not include 

( i i)  disclosure of conflict of direct engagement of a retired 
interest. Government servant. 

( i i i)  Disclosure by the bidder of any Note: These Services typically 
previous transgressions made in involve providing expert or strategic 
respect of the provisions of sub- advice e.g., management 
clause (i) with any entity in any consultants, policy consultants, 
country during the last three communications consultants, 
years or of being debarred by Advisory and project related 
any other procuring entity. Consulting Services which include, 

Rule 175 (2) The procuring entity, after giving feasibility studies, project 
a reasonable opportunity of being management, engineering services, 
heard, comes to the conclusion that a finance, accounting and taxation 
bidder or prospective bidder, as the services, training and development 
case may be, has contravened the etc. 
code of integrity, may take Rule 178 The Ministries or Departments may 
appropriate measures. hire external professionals, 

Rule 176 Buy-Back Offer consultancy firms or consultants 
When it is decided with the approval (referred to as consultant 
of the competent authority to hereinafter) for a specific job, which 
replace an existing old item(s) with a is well defined in terms of content 
new and better version, the and time frame for its completion. 

 47 



Rule 179 This chapter contains the ( i i )  Where the estimated cost of the 
fundamental principles applicable to consulting services is above 
all Ministries or Departments [Rupees Fifty lakhs]44, in 
regarding engagement of addition to (i) above, an enquiry 
consultant(s). Detailed instructions for seeking 'Expression of 
to this effect may be issued by the Interest' from consultants 
concerned Ministries or should be published on [GeM as 
Departments. However, the well as on GeM- Central Public 
Ministries or Departments shall Procurement Portal (CPPP)]45. 
ensure that they do not contravene An organisation having its own 
the basic rules contained in this website should also publish all 
chapter. its advertised tender enquiries 

Rule 180 Identification of Services on the website. Enquiry for 
required to be performed by seeking Expression of Interest 
Consultants: Engagement of should include in brief, the 
consultants may be resorted to in broad scope of work or service, 
situations requiring high quality inputs to be provided by the 
services for which the concerned Ministry or Department, 
Ministry/ Department does not have eligibility and the pre-
requisite expertise. Approval of the qualification criteria to be met 
competent authority should be by the consultant(s) and 
obtained before engaging consultant's past experience in 
consultant(s). similar work or service. The 

Rule 181 Preparation of scope of the consultants may also be asked 
required Consultant(s): The to send their comments on the 
Ministries/ Departments should objectives and scope of the 
prepare in simple and concise work or service projected in the 
language the requirement, enquiry. Adequate time should 
objectives and the scope of the be allowed for getting 
assignment. The eligibility and responses from interested 
prequalification criteria to be met by consultants. 
the consultants should also be Rule 184 Short listing of consultants. On 
clearly identified at this stage. the basis of responses received from 

Rule 182 Estimating reasonable the interested parties as per Rule 
expenditure: Ministry or 183 above, consultants meeting the 
Department proposing to engage requirements should be short listed 
consultant(s) should estimate for further consideration. The 
reasonable expenditure for the same number of short listed consultants 
by ascertaining the prevalent market should not be less than three. 
conditions and consulting other Rule 185 Preparation of Terms of 
organisations engaged in similar Reference (TOR). 
activities. The TOR should include 

Rule 183 Identification of likely sources. ( i)  Precise statement of objectives. 
( i )  Where the estimated cost of the ( i i)  Outline of the tasks to be 

consulting service is up to carried out. 
[Rupees Fifty lakhs]43, ( i i i)  Schedule for completion of 
preparation of a long list of tasks. 
potential consultants may be ( iv)  The support or inputs to be 
done on the basis of formal or provided by the Ministry or 
informal enquiries from other Department to facilitate the 
Ministries or Departments or consultancy. 
Organisations involved in similar (v)  The final outputs that will be 
activities, Chambers of required of the Consultant. 
Commerce & Industry, Rule 186 Preparation and Issue of 
Association of consultancy firms Request for Proposal (RFP). RFP 
etc. is the document to be used by the 

 
43 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024. 45 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
44 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

 48 



Ministry/Department for obtaining technically qualified by the 
offers from the consultants for the Consultancy Evaluation Committee as 
required service. The RFP should be per Rule 189 above for further 
issued to the shortlisted consultants analysis or evaluation and ranking 
to seek their technical and financial and selecting the successful bidder 
proposals. The RFP should contain: for placement of the consultancy 

( i)  A letter of Invitation contract. 
( i i )  Information to Consultants Rule 191 Methods of Selection/ Evaluation 

regarding the procedure for of Consultancy Proposals 
submission of proposal. The basis of selection of the 

( i i i )  Terms of Reference (TOR). consultant shall follow any of the 
( iv)  Eligibility and pre-qualification methods given in Rule 192 to 194 as 

criteria in case the same has not appropriate for the circumstances in 
been ascertained through each case. 
Enquiry for Expression of Rule 192 Quality and Cost Based Selection 
Interest. (QCBS):QCBS may be used for 

(v) List of key position whose CV Procurement of consultancy 
and experience would be services, where quality of 
evaluated. consultancy is of prime concern. 

(vi)  Bid evaluation criteria and (i) In QCBS initially the quality of 
selection procedure. technical proposals is scored as 

(vii)  Standard formats for technical per criteria announced in the 
and financial proposal. RFP. Only those responsive 

(vii i)  Proposed contract terms. proposals that have achieved at 
(ix)  Procedure proposed to be least minimum specified 

followed for midterm review of qualifying score in quality of 
the progress of the work and technical proposal are 
review of the final draft report. considered further. 

Rule 187 Receipt and opening of proposals ( i i )  After opening and scoring, the 
Proposals should ordinarily be asked Financial proposals of 
for from consultants in 'Two bid' responsive technically qualified 
system with technical and financial bidders, a final combined score 
bids sealed separately. The bidder is arrived at by giving 
should put these two sealed predefined relative weight ages 
envelopes in a bigger envelop duly for the score of quality of the 
sealed and submit the same to the technical proposal and the score 
Ministry or Department by the of financial proposal. 
specified date and time at the ( i i i )  The RFP shall specify the 
specified place. On receipt, the minimum qualifying score for 
technical proposals should be opened the quality of technical proposal 
first by the Ministry or Department at and also the relative weight 
the specified date, time and place. ages to be given to the quality 

Rule 188 Late Bids. Late bids i.e. bids received and cost (determined for each 
after the specified date and time of case depending on the relative 
receipt should not be considered. importance of quality vis-a-vis 

Rule 189 Evaluation of Technical Bids: cost aspects in the assignment, 
Technical bids should be analysed e.g. 70:30, 60:40, 50:50 etc). 
and evaluated by a Consultancy The proposal with the highest 
Evaluation Committee (CEC) weighted combined score 
constituted by the Ministry or (quality and cost) shall be 
Department. The CEC shall record in selected. 
detail the reasons for acceptance or ( i v )  The weight age of the technical 
rejection of the technical proposals parameters i.e. non- financial 
analysed and evaluated by it. parameters in no case should 

Rule 190 Evaluation of Financial Bids of exceed 80 percent. 
the technically qualified bidders: Rule 193 Least Cost System (LCS). LCS is 
The Ministry or Department shall appropriate for assignments of a 
open the financial bids of only those standard or routine nature (such as 
bidders who have been declared audits and engineering design of 

 49 



non-complex works) where well continuously monitoring the 
established methodologies, practices performance of the consultant(s) so 
and standards exist. Unlike QCBS, that the output of the consultancy is 
there is no weight age for Technical in line with the 
score in the final evaluation and the Ministry/Department's objectives. 
responsive technically qualified Rule 196 Public competition for Design of 
proposal with the lowest evaluated symbols/logos. Design 
cost shall be selected. competition should be conducted in 

Rule 194 Single Source a transparent, fair and objective 
Selection/Consultancy by manner. Wide publicity should be 
nomination. The selection by direct given to the competition so as to 
negotiation/nomination, on the lines ensure that the information is 
of Single Tender mode of accessible to all possible participants 
procurement of goods, is considered in the competition. This should 
appropriate only under exceptional include publication on the website of 
circumstance such as: Ministry/Department concerned, as 

(i) tasks that represent a natural also the Central Public Procurement 
continuation of previous work Portal. If the selection has been by a 
carried out by the firm; jury of experts nominated for the 

(ii) in case of an emergency purpose, the composition of the jury 
situation, situations arising after may also be notified. 
natural disasters, situations B. OUTSOURCING OF SERVICES 
where timely completion of the Rule 197 "Non-Consulting Service" means 
assignment is of utmost any subject matter of procurement 
importance; and (which as distinguished from 

(iii) situations where execution of 'Consultancy Services'), involve 
the assignment may involve use physical, measurable deliverables/ 
of proprietary techniques or outcomes, where performance 
only one consultant has standards can be clearly identified 
requisite expertise. and consistently applied, other than 

(iv) Under some special goods or works, except those 
circumstances, it may become incidental or consequential to the 
necessary to select a particular service, and includes maintenance, 
consultant where adequate hiring of vehicle, outsourcing of 
justification is available for such building facilities management, 
single-source selection in the security, photocopier service, 
context of the overall interest of janitor, office errand services, 
the Ministry or Department. Full drilling, aerial photography, satellite 
justification for single source imagery, mapping etc. 
selection should be recorded in Rule 198 Procurement of Non-consulting 
the file and approval of the Services. 
competent authority obtained A Ministry or Department may 
before resorting to such single- procure certain non-consulting 
source selection. services in the interest of economy 

(v) It shall ensure fairness and and efficiency and it may prescribe 
equity, and shall have a detailed instructions and procedures 
procedure in place to ensure for this purpose without, however, 
that the prices are reasonable contravening the following basic 
and consistent with market guidelines. 
rates for tasks of a similar Rule 199 Identification of likely 
nature; and the required contractors. 
consultancy services are not The Ministry or Department should 
split into smaller sized prepare a list of likely and potential 
procurement. contractors on the basis of formal or 

Rule 195 Monitoring the Contract. The informal enquiries from other 
Ministry/Department should be Ministries or Departments and 
involved throughout in the conduct Organisations involved in similar 
of consultancy, preferably by taking activities, scrutiny of 'Yellow pages', 
a task force approach and and trade journals, if available, web 

 50 



site etc. Rule 203 Evaluation of Bids Received. 
Rule 200 Preparation of Tender enquiry. The Ministry or Department should 

Ministry or Department should evaluate, segregate, rank the 
prepare a tender enquiry responsive bids and select the 
containing, inter alia : successful bidder for placement of 

(i) The details of the work or the contract. 
service to be performed by the Rule 204 Procurement of Non-consulting 
contractor; services by nomination. Should it 

(ii) The facilities and the inputs become necessary, in an exceptional 
which will be provided to the situation to procure a non-consulting 
contractor by the Ministry or service from a specifically chosen 
Department; contractor, the Competent Authority 

(iii) Eligibility and qualification in the Ministry or Department may 
criteria to be met by the do so in consultation with the 
contractor for performing the Financial Adviser. In such cases the 
required work/service; and detailed justification, the 

(iv) The statutory and contractual circumstances leading to such 
obligations to be complied with procurement by choice and the 
by the contractor. special interest or purpose it shall 

Rule 201 Invitation of Bids. serve, shall form an integral part of 
(i) For estimated value of the non- the proposal. 

consulting service up to Rule 205 Monitoring the Contract. The 
[Rupees Fifty lakhs]46 or less: Ministry or Department should be 
The Ministry or Department involved throughout in the conduct 
should scrutinise the of the contract and continuously 
preliminary list of likely monitor the performance of the 
contractors as identified as per contractor. 
Rule 199 above, decide the Rule 206 Any circumstances which are not 
prima facie Eligible and capable covered in Rule 198 to Rule 205 for 
contractors and issue limited procurement of non-consulting 
tender enquiry to them asking services, the procuring entity may 
for their offers by a specified refer Rule 142 to Rule 176 pertaining 
date and time etc. as per to procurement of goods and not to 
standard practice. The number the procurement of consulting 
of the contractors so identified services. 
for issuing limited tender 
enquiry should be more than 
three. 

(ii) For estimated value of the non-
consulting service above [Rs. 50 
lakhs]47: The Ministry or 
Department should issue 
advertisement in such cases on 
[GeM as well as on GeM-
CPPP]48. An organisation having 
its own website should also 
publish all its advertised tender 
enquiries on the website. The 
advertisements for invitation of 
tenders should give the 
complete web address from 
where the bidding documents 
can be downloaded. 

Rule 202 Late Bids. Late bids i.e. bids received 
after the specified date and time of 
receipt should not be considered. 

 
46 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 48 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
47 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

 51 



CH- 7 INVENTORY MANAGEMENT the indenting officer shall 
 examine, count, measure or 

Rule 207 This chapter contains the basic rules weigh the materials as the case 
applicable to all Ministries or may be, to ensure that the 
Departments regarding inventory quantities are correct, the 
management. Detailed instructions quality is in line with the 
and procedures relating to inventory required specifications and 
management may be prescribed by there is no damage or 
various Ministries or Departments deficiency in the materials. An 
broadly in conformity with the basic appropriate receipt shall also be 
rules contained in this chapter. given to this effect by the 

Rule 208 (1) Receipt of goods and indenting officer to the division 
materials from private sending the materials. 
suppliers. (ii) In the case of issue of materials 

(i) While receiving goods and from stock for departmental 
materials from a supplier, the use, manufacture, sale, etc., the 

officer—in-charge of stores Officer-in charge of the stores 
should refer to the relevant shall see that an appropriate 
contract terms and follow the indent, in the prescribed form 
prescribed procedure for has been projected by the 
receiving the materials. indenting officer. A 

( i i )  All materials shall be counted, written/online 
measured or weighed and acknowledgement of receipt of 
subjected to visual inspection at material issued shall be 
the time of receipt to ensure obtained from the indenting 
that the quantities are correct, officer or his authorised 
the quality is according to the representative at the time of 
required specifications and issue of materials. 
there is no damage or (iii) In case of materials issued to a 
deficiency in the materials. contractor, the cost of which is 
Technical inspection where recoverable from the 

required should be carried out contractor, all relevant 
at this stage by Technical particulars, including the 
Inspector or Agency approved recovery rates and the total 
for the purpose. An appropriate value chargeable to the 
receipt, in terms of the relevant contractor should be got 
contract provisions may also be acknowledged from the 
given to the supplier on contractor duly signed and 
receiving the materials. dated. 

( i i i )  Details of the material so (iv) If the Officer-in-charge of the 
received should thereafter be stores is unable to comply with 
entered in the appropriate stock the indent in full, he should 
register, preferably in an IT- make the supply to the extent 
based system. The officer-in- available and make suitable 
charge of stores should certify entry to this effect in the 

that he has actually received the indentor's copy of the indent. In 
material and recorded it in the case alternative materials are 
appropriate stock registers. available in lieu of the indented 

Rule 209 Receipt/issue of goods and materials, a suitable indication 
materials from internal to this effect may be made in 
divisions of the same the document. 
organisation. Rule 210 Custody of goods and materials. 

(i) The indenting officer requiring The officer-in-charge of stores having 
goods and materials from custody of goods and materials, 
internal division(s) of the same especially valuable and/or 
organisation should project an combustible articles, shall take 
indent in the prescribed form for appropriate steps for arranging their 
this purpose. While receiving safe custody, proper storage 
the supply against the indent, accommodation, including 

 52 



arrangements for maintaining Assets. 
required temperature, dust free The inventory for fixed assets shall 
environment etc. ordinarily be maintained at site. 

Rule 211 Lists and Accounts. Fixed assets should be verified at 
(i) The Officer-in-charge of least once in a year and the outcome 

stores shall maintain of the verification recorded in the 
suitable item-wise lists and corresponding register. 
accounts and prepare Discrepancies, if any, shall be 
accurate returns in respect promptly investigated and brought 
of the goods and materials to account. 
in his charge making it Rule 213 (2) Verification of Consumables: 
possible at any point of time A physical verification of all the 
to check the actual balances consumable goods and materials 
with the book balances. The should be undertaken at least once 
form of the stock accounts in a year and discrepancies, if any, 
mentioned above shall be should be recorded in the stock 
determined with reference register for appropriate action by the 
to the nature of the goods competent authority. 
and materials, the Rule 213 (3) Procedure for verification: 
frequency of the (i) Verification shall always be 
transactions and the special made in the presence of the 
requirements of the officer, responsible for the 
concerned custody of the inventory being 
Ministries/Departments. verified. 

(ii) Separate accounts shall be (ii) A certificate of verification along 
kept for with the findings shall be 
( a)  Fixed Assets such as plant, recorded in the stock register. 

machinery, equipment, (iii) Discrepancies, including 
furniture, fixtures etc. in shortages, damages and 
the Form GFR-22. unserviceable goods, if any, 

(b)  Consumables such as identified during verification, 
office stationery, shall immediately be brought to 
chemicals, maintenance the notice of the competent 
spare parts etc. in the Form authority for taking appropriate 
GFR-23. action in accordance with 

( c)  Library books in the Form provision given in Rule 33 to 38. 
GFR 18 Rule 214 Buffer Stock. Depending on the 

(d)  Assets of historical/artistic frequency of requirement and 
value held by quantity thereof as well as the pattern 
museum/government of supply of a consumable material, 
departments in the Form optimum buffer stock should be 
GFR-24. determined by the competent 

Note: These forms can be authority. 
supplemented with additional Note: As the inventory carrying cost 
details by Ministries/ is an expenditure that does not add 
Departments as required. value to the material being stocked, a 

Rule 212 Hiring out of Fixed Assets. When material remaining in stock for over a 
a fixed asset is hired to local bodies, year shall generally be considered 
contractors or others, proper record surplus, unless adequate reasons to 
should be kept of the assets and the treat it otherwise exist. The items so 
hire and other charges as declared surplus may be dealt as per 
determined under rules prescribed the procedure laid down under Rule 
by the competent authority, should 217. 
be recovered regularly. Calculation Rule 215 Physical verification of Library 
of the charges to be recovered from books. 
the local bodies, contractors and (i) Complete physical verification of 
others as above should be based on books should be done every 
the historical cost. year in case of libraries having 

Rule 213 (1) Physical verification of Fixed not more than twenty thousand 

 53 



volumes. For libraries having (iii) The book value, guiding price 
more than twenty thousand and reserved price, which will 
volumes and up to fifty be required while disposing of 
thousand volumes, such the surplus goods, should also 
verification should be done at be worked out. In case where it 
least once in three years. is not possible to work out the 
Sample physical verification at book value, the original 
intervals of not more than three purchase price of the goods in 
years should be done in case of question may be utilised. A 
libraries having more than fifty report of stores for disposal 
thousand volumes. In case such shall be prepared in Form GFR- 
verification reveals unusual or 10. 
unreasonable shortages, (iv) In case an item becomes 
complete verification shall be unserviceable due to 
done. negligence, fraud or mischief on 

(ii) Loss of five volumes per one the part of a Government 
thousand volumes of books servant, responsibility for the 
issued/consulted in a year may same should be fixed. 
be taken as reasonable (v) Sale of Hazardous 
provided such losses are not waste/Scrap 
attributable to dishonesty or Batteries/Electronic waste: 
negligence. However, loss of a Scrap lots comprising of 
book of a value exceeding Rs. hazardous waste, batteries etc. 
1,000/- (Rupees One thousand shall be sold keeping in view the 
only) and rare books extant guidelines of Ministry of 
irrespective of value shall Environment & Forest. 
invariably be investigated and Prospective bidders of such lots 
appropriate action taken. of hazardous waste/scrap 

Rule 216 Transfer of charge of goods, batteries/ e-waste should be in 
materials etc. In case of transfer of possession of registration, valid 
Officer-in-charge of the goods, on the date of e-Auction and on 
materials etc., the transferred officer the date of delivery, as recycler/ 
shall see that the goods or material preprocessor agency. 
are made over correctly to his Rule 218 Modes of Disposal. 
successor. A statement giving all (i) Surplus or obsolete or 
relevant details of the goods, unserviceable goods of assessed 
materials etc., in question shall be residual value above [Rupees 
prepared and signed with date by the Four Lakh]49 should be disposed 
relieving officer and the relieved of by: 
officer. Each of these officers will (a) obtaining bids through 
retain a copy of the signed statement. advertised tender or 

Rule 217 Disposal of Goods. ( b )  public auction. For surplus 
(i) An item may be declared or obsolete or 

surplus or obsolete or unserviceable goods with 
unserviceable if the same is of residual value less than 
no use to the Ministry or [Rupees Four Lakh]50, the 
Department. The reasons for mode of disposal will be 
declaring the item surplus or determined by the 
obsolete or unserviceable competent authority, 
should be recorded by the keeping in view the 
authority competent to necessity to avoid 
purchase the item. accumulation of such goods 

(ii)  The competent authority may, and consequential blockage 
at his discretion, constitute a of space and, also, 
committee at appropriate level deterioration in value of 
to declare item(s) as surplus or goods to be disposed of. 
obsolete or unserviceable. Ministries/ Departments 

 
49 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 50 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry 
of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 of Finance (MoF) OM No. F.1/3/2024-PPD dated 10.07.2024 

 54 



should, as far as possible transparency, 
prepare a list of such competition, fairness and 
goods. elimination of discretion. 

( i i )  Certain surplus or obsolete or Wide publicity should be 
unserviceable goods such as ensured of the sale plan 
expired medicines, food grain, and the goods to be sold. 
ammunition etc., which are All the required terms 
hazardous or unfit for human and conditions of sale are 
consumption, should be to be incorporated in the 
disposed of or destroyed bidding document 
immediately by adopting comprehensively in plain 
suitable mode so as to avoid any and simple language. 
health hazard and/or Applicability of taxes, as 
environmental pollution and also relevant, should be 
the possibility of misuse of such clearly stated in the 
goods. document. 

( i i i )  Surplus or obsolete or (b) The bidding document 
unserviceable goods, should also indicate the 
equipment and documents, location and present 
which involve security condition of the goods to 
concerns (e.g. currency, be sold so that the 
negotiable instruments, bidders can inspect the 
receipt books, stamps, goods before bidding. 
security press etc.) should (c) The bidders should be 
be disposed of/ destroyed asked to furnish bid 
in an appropriate manner security along with their 
to ensure compliance with bids. The amount of bid 
rules relating to official security should ordinarily 
secrets as well as financial be ten per cent. of the 
prudence. assessed or reserved 

Rule 219 Disposal through Advertised Tender. price of the goods. The 
(i) The broad steps to be adopted exact bid security amount 

for this purpose are as follows  should be indicated in the 
(a) Preparation of bidding bidding document. 

documents. (d) The bid of the highest 
(b) Invitation of tender for the acceptable responsive 

surplus goods to be sold. bidder should normally 
(c) Opening of bids. be accepted. However, if 
(d) Analysis and evaluation of the price offered by that 

bids received. bidder is not acceptable, 
(e) Selection of highest negotiation may be held 

responsive bidder. only with that bidder. In 
(f) Collection of sale value case such negotiation 

from the selected bidder. does not provide the 
(g) Issue of sale release order desired result, the 

to the selected bidder. reasonable or acceptable 
(h) Release of the sold surplus price may be counter 

goods to the selected offered to the next 
bidder. highest responsive 

(i) Return of bid security to bidder(s). 
the unsuccessful bidders. (e) In case the total quantity 

(ii) The important aspects to be to be disposed of cannot 
kept in view while disposing be taken up by the 
the goods through advertised highest acceptable 
tender are as under:- bidder, the remaining 
(a) The basic principle for quantity may be offered 

sale of such goods to the next higher 
through advertised bidder(s) at the price 
tender is ensuring offered by the highest 

 55 



acceptable bidder. value) should immediately be 
(f) Full payment, i.e. the taken on the spot from the 

residual amount after successful bidder either in cash 
adjusting the bid security or in the form of Deposit-at-
should be obtained from Call-Receipt (DACR), drawn in 
the successful bidder favour of the Ministry or 
before releasing the Department selling the goods. 
goods. The goods should be handed 

(g) In case the selected over to the successful bidder 
bidder does not show only after receiving the balance 
interest in lifting the payment. 
goods, the bid security (v) The composition of the auction 
should be forfeited and team will be decided by the 
other actions initiated competent authority. The team 
including re-sale of the should however include an 
goods in question at the officer of the Internal Finance 
risk and cost of the Wing of the department 
defaulter, after obtaining Rule 221 Disposal at scrap value or by 
legal advice. other modes. If a Ministry or Department 

(iii) Late bids i.e. bids received after is unable to sell any surplus or obsolete or 
the specified date and time of unserviceable item in spite of its attempts 
receipt should not to be through advertised tender or auction, it 
considered. may dispose of the same at its scrap value 

Rule 220 Disposal through Auction. with the approval of the competent 
(i) A Ministry or Department may authority in consultation with Finance 

undertake auction of goods to division. In case the Ministry or Department 
be disposed of either directly or is unable to sell the item even at its scrap 
through approved auctioneers. value, it may adopt any other mode of 

(ii) The basic principles to be disposal including destruction of the item in 
followed here are similar to an eco-friendly manner. 
those applicable for disposal Rule 222 A sale account should be prepared for 
through advertised tender so as goods disposed of in Form GFR 11 duly 
to ensure transparency, signed by the officer who supervised the 
competition, fairness and sale or auction. 
elimination of discretion. The Rule 223 (1) Powers to write off. All profits 
auction plan including details of and losses due to revaluation, stock-taking 
the goods to be auctioned and or other causes shall be duly recorded and 
their location, applicable terms adjusted where necessary. Formal sanction 
and conditions of the sale etc. of the competent authority shall be 
should be given wide publicity in obtained in respect of losses, even though 
the same manner as is done in no formal correction or adjustment in 
case of advertised tender. government accounts is involved. Powers 

(iii) While starting the auction to write off of losses are available under the 
process, the condition and Delegation of Financial Powers Rules. 
location of the goods to be Rule 223 (2) Losses due to depreciation : 
auctioned, applicable terms and Losses due to depreciation shall be 
conditions of sale etc., (as analysed, and recorded under following 
already indicated earlier while heads, as applicable :- 
giving vide publicity for the (i) normal fluctuation of market 
same), should be announced prices; 
again for the benefit of the (ii) normal wear and tear; 
assembled bidders. (iii) lack of foresight in regulating 

(iv) During the auction process, purchases; and 
acceptance or rejection of a bid (iv) negligence after purchase. 
should be announced Rule 223 (3) Losses not due to 
immediately on the stroke of the depreciation : Losses not due to 
hammer. If a bid is accepted, depreciation shall be grouped under the 
earnest money (not less than following heads :- 
twenty-five per cent. of the bid (i) losses due to theft or fraud; 

 56 



(ii) losses due to neglect; 
(iii) anticipated losses on account of 

obsolescence of stores or of 
purchases in excess of 
requirements; 

(iv) losses due to damage, and 
(v) losses due to extra ordinary 

situations under 'Force Majeure' 
conditions like fire, flood, 
enemy action, etc.; 

 57 



CH-8 CONTRACT MANAGEMENT taken in drafting the clauses in 
 the contract. 

Rule 224 (1) All contracts shall be made by an (iv)  
authority empowered to do so by or (a) A Ministry or Department 
under the orders of the President in may, at its discretion, 
terms of Article 299 (1) of the make purchases of value 
Constitution of India. up to Rupees two lakh 

Rule 224 (2) All the contracts and assurances and fifty thousand by 
of property made in the exercise of issuing purchase orders 
the executive power of the Union containing basic terms 
shall be executed on behalf of the and conditions: 
President. The words "for and on (b) In respect of Works 
behalf of the President of India" Contracts, or Contracts 
should follow the designation for purchases valued 
appended below the signature of the between Rupees one lakh 
officer authorized in this behalf. to Rupees ten lakhs, 

Note 1: The various classes of where tender documents 
contracts and assurances of property, include the General 
which may be executed by different Conditions of Contract 
authorities, are specified in the (GCC), Special Conditions 
Notifications issued by the Ministry of of Contract (SCC) and 
Law from time to time. scope of work, the letter 
Note 2: [The powers of various of acceptance will result 
authorities, the conditions under in a binding contract. 
which such powers should be (c) In respect of contracts for 
exercised and the general procedure works with estimated 
prescribed with regard to various value of Rupees ten lakhs 
classes of contracts and assurances or above or for purchase 
of property are laid down in [Rule 11] above Rupees ten lakhs, 
of the Delegation of Financial Powers a Contract document 

Rules.]51 should be executed, with 

Rule 225 General principles for contract. all necessary clauses to 

The following general principles make it a self-contained 

should be observed while entering contract. If however, 

into contracts:— these are preceded by 

(i) The terms of contract must be Invitation to Tender, 

precise, definite and without accompanied by GCC and 

any ambiguities. The terms SCC, with full details of 

should not involve an uncertain scope and specifications, 

or indefinite liability, except in a simple one page 

the case of a cost plus contract contract can be entered 

or where there is a price into by attaching copies 

variation clause in the contract. of the GCC and SCC, and 

(ii) Standard forms of contracts details of scope and 

should be adopted wherever specifications, Offer of 

possible, with such the Tenderer and Letter 

modifications as are considered of Acceptance. 

necessary in respect of (d) Contract document 

individual contracts. The should be invariably 

modifications should be carried executed in cases of 

out only after obtaining financial turnkey works or 

and legal advice. agreements for 

(iii) In cases where standard forms maintenance of 

of contracts are not used, legal equipment, provision of 

and financial advice should be services etc. 
(v) No work of any kind should be 

 
51  Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE),  
Ministry of Finance (MoF) OM No. 14(37)/2015-E.II.A dated  
12.07.2024. 

 58 



commenced without proper to enable variations being 
execution of an agreement as calculated with reference 
given in the foregoing to the price levels 
provisions. prevailing in that month 

(vi) Contract document, where and year. 
necessary, should be executed (b) A formula for calculation 
within 21 days of the issue of of the price variations 
letter of acceptance. Non- that have taken place 
fulfilment of this condition of between the Base level 
executing a contract by the and the Scheduled 
Contractor or Supplier would Delivery Date should be 
constitute sufficient ground for included in this clause. 
annulment of the award and The variations are 
forfeiture of Earnest Money calculated by using 
Deposit. indices published by 

(vii) Cost plus contracts should Governments or 
ordinarily be avoided. Where Chambers of Commerce 
such contracts become periodically. An 
unavoidable, full justification illustrative formula has 
should be recorded before been appended to these 
entering into the contract. rules at Appendix -11 for 
Where supplies or special work guidance. 
covered by such cost plus (c) The Price variation clause 
contracts have to continue over should also specify cut off 
a long duration, efforts should dates for material and 
be made to convert future labour, as these inputs 
contracts on a firm price basis taper off well before the 
after allowing a reasonable scheduled Delivery 
period to the Dates. 
suppliers/contractors to (d) The price variation clause 
stabilize their production/ should provide for a 
execution methods and ceiling on price 
processes.  variations, particularly 

Explanation: A cost plus contract where escalations are 
means a contract in which the involved. It could be a 
price payable for supplies or percentage per annum or 
services under the contract is an overall ceiling or both. 
determined on the basis of The buyer should ensure 
actual cost of production of the a provision in the 
supplies or services concerned contract for benefit of 
plus profit either at a fixed rate any reduction in the price 
per unit or at a fixed percentage in terms of the price 
on the actual cost of production variation clause being 

(viii)  passed on to him. 
(a) Price Variation Clause can (e) The clause should also 

be provided only in long- stipulate a minimum 
term contracts, where percentage of variation of 
the delivery period the contract price above 
extends beyond 18 which price variations will 
months. In short-term be admissible (e.g. where 
contracts firm and fixed resultant increase is 
prices should be provided lower than two per cent, 
for. Where a price no price adjustment will 
variation clause is be made in favour of the 
provided, the price supplier). 
agreed upon should (f) Where advance or stage 
specify the base level viz, payments are made there 
the month and year to should be a further 
which the price is linked, stipulation that no price 

 59 



variations will be should also be stipulated 
admissible on such in the Contract. 
portions of the price, (k) The clause should also 
after the dates of such contain the mode and 
payment terms of payment of the 

(g) Where deliveries are price variation 
accepted beyond the admissible. 
scheduled Delivery Date (ix) Contracts should include 
subject to levy of provision for payment of all 
liquidated damages as applicable taxes by the 
provided in the Contract, contractor or supplier. 
the liquidated damages (x) "Lump sum” contracts should 
(if a percentage of the not be entered into except in 
price) will be applicable cases of absolute necessity. 
on the price as varied by Where lump sum contracts 
the operation of the Price become unavoidable, full 
variation clause. justification should be recorded. 

(h) No price variation will be The contracting authority 
admissible beyond the should ensure that conditions in 
original Scheduled the lump sum contract 
Delivery Date for defaults adequately safeguard and 
on the part of the protect the interests of the 
supplier. Government. 

(i) Price variation may be (xi) Departmental issue of materials 
allowed beyond the should be avoided as far as 
original Scheduled possible. Where it is decided to 
Delivery Date, by specific supply materials 
alteration of that date departmentally, a schedule of 
through an amendment quantities with the issue rates of 
to the contract in cases of such material as are required to 
Force Majeure or defaults execute the contract work 
by Government. should form an essential part of 

(j) Where contracts are for the contract. 
supply of equipment, (xii)  
goods etc, imported (a) In contracts where 
(subject to customs duly government property is 
and foreign exchange entrusted to a contractor 
fluctuations) and/or either for use on payment 
locally manufactured of hire charges or for 
(subject to excise duty doing further work on 
and other duties and such property, specific 
taxes), the percentage provision for 
and element of duties safeguarding 
and taxes included in the government property 
price should be (including insurance 
specifically stated, along cover) and for recovery 
with the selling rate of of hire charges regularly, 
foreign exchange should be included in the 
element taken into contracts. 
account in the calculation (b) Provision should be made 
of the price of the in the contract for 
imported item. periodical physical 

 The mode of calculation verification of the number 
of variations in duties and and the physical 
taxes and foreign condition of the items at 
exchange rates and the the contractor's 
documents to be premises. Results of such 
produced in support of verification should be 
claims for such variations recorded and appropriate 

 60 



penal action taken where procuring entity in writing, an 
necessary. exemption from such provision 

(xiii) [Copies of all contracts and can be made. 
agreements for purchases of (xvii) A warranty clause should be 
the value of Rupees Twenty-five incorporated in every contract, 
Lakhs and above entered into requiring the supplier to, 
by civil departments of the without charge, repair or rectify 
Government, should be sent to defective goods or to replace 
the Audit Officer and or the such goods with similar goods 
Accounts officer as the case free from defect. Any goods 
may be.]52 repaired or replaced by the 

(xiv)  supplier shall be delivered at the 
(a) The terms of a contract, buyers premises without costs 

including the scope and to the buyer. 
specification once (xviii) All contracts for supply of goods 
entered into, should not should reserve the right of 
be materially varied. Government to reject goods 

(b) Wherever material which do not conform to the 
variation in any of the specifications. 
terms or conditions in a (xix) No claim for the payment from 
contract becomes contractor shall be entertained 
unavoidable, the financial after the lapse of three years of 
and other effects arising of the claim. 
involved should be Rule 226 Management of Contracts. 
examined and recorded (i) Implementation of the contract 
and specific approval of should be strictly monitored and 
the authority competent notices issued promptly 
to approve the revised whenever a breach of provisions 
financial and other occurs. 
commitments obtained, (ii) Proper procedure for safe 
before varying the custody and monitoring of Bank 
conditions. Guarantees or other 

(c) All such changes should Instruments should be laid 
be in the form of an down. Monitoring should 
amendment to the include a monthly review of all 
contract duly signed by Bank Guarantees or other 
all parties to the contract. instruments expiring after three 

(xv) Normally no extensions of the months, along with a review of 
scheduled delivery or the progress of supply or work. 
completion dates should be Extensions of Bank Guarantees 
granted except where events or other instruments, where 
constituting force majeure, as warranted, should be sought 
provided in the contract, have immediately. 
occurred or the terms and Rule 227 Legal Advice. 
conditions include such a Wherever disputes arise during 
provision for other reasons. implementation of a contract, legal 
Extensions as provided in the advice should be sought before 
contract may be allowed initiating action to refer the dispute to 
through formal amendments to conciliation and/or arbitration as 
the contract duly signed by provided in the contract or to file a suit 
parties to the contract. where the contract does not include an 

(xvi) All contracts shall contain a arbitration clause. The draft of the 
provision for recovery of plaint for arbitration should be got 
liquidated damages for defaults vetted by obtaining legal and financial 
on the part of the contractor. advice. Documents to be filed in the 
Only in exceptional matter of resolution of dispute, if any, 
circumstances to be justified by should be carefully scrutinized before 

 
52 Amended vide DoE OM No. F.1/26/2018-PPD dated  
02.04.2019. 

 61 



filing to safeguard government 
interest. 

[Rule 227A Arbitration Awards 
(i) In cases where the Ministry/ 

Department has challenged an 
arbitral award and, as a result, 
the amount of the arbitral 
award has not been paid, 75% 
of the arbitral award (which 
may include interest up to date 
of the award) shall be paid by 
the Ministry/ Department to the 
contractor/ concessionaire 
against a Bank Guarantee (BG). 
The BG shall only be for the said 
75% of the arbitral award as 
above and not for the interest 
which may become payable to 
the Ministry/ Department 
should the subsequent court 
order require refund of the said 
amount. 

(ii) The payment may be made into 
a designated Escrow Account 
with the stipulation that the 
proceeds will be used first, for 
payment of lenders' dues, 
second, for completion of the 
project and then for completion 
of other projects of the same 
Ministry/ Department as 
mutually agreed/ decided. Any 
balance remaining in the escrow 
account subsequent to 
settlement of lenders' dues and 
completion of projects of the 
Ministry/ Department may be 
allowed to be used by the 
contractor/ concessionaire with 
the prior approval of the lead 
banker and the Ministry/ 
Department. If otherwise 
eligible and subject to 
contractual provisions, 
retention money and other 
amounts withheld may also be 
released against BG.]53 

 
 

  
  

 
53 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F./1/9/2021-PPD dated  
29.10.2021. . 

 62 



Ch.-9 - GRANTS-IN-AID AND LOANS 
I. GRANTS-IN-AID undertaken by them. The Ministry 
 or Department should examine in 
Rule 228 As a general principle Grants-in-aid can detail: (a) whether the activities 

be given to a person or a public body or proposed to be taken up are 
an institution having a distinct legal entity. necessary at all; (b) whether 
Thus Grants-in-aid including scholarships these activities, if necessary, 
may be sanctioned by an authority need to be undertaken by setting 
competent to do so under the Delegation up an autonomous organisation 
of Financial Powers Rules to: — only or whether these could be 
(a) Institutions or Organizations set performed by the concerned 

up as Autonomous Government agency or any other 
Organisations, under a specific organisation already existing. 
statute or as a society registered (iv) All autonomous organisations, 
under the Societies Registration new or already in existence 
Act, 1860 or Indian Trusts Act, should be encouraged to 
1882 or other statutes. maximise generation of internal 

(b) Voluntary organizations or Non- resources and eventually attain 
Government Organisations self-sufficiency. 
carrying out activities which (v) The Ministry or Department may 
promote the welfare schemes consider creating a Corpus Fund 
and programmes of the for an Autonomous Body only 
Government should be selected with prior concurrence of Ministry 
on the basis of well-defined of Finance if the corpus is 
criteria regarding financial and created out of budgetary 
other resources, credibility and allocation. If the corpus is created 
type of activities undertaken. out of internal accruals of the 

(c) Educational and other institutions body, approval of the 
by way of scholarships or administrative Ministry must be 
stipends to the students. obtained. 

(d) Urban and Rural local self- (vi) User Charges: Governing Body 
government institutions of the Autonomous Body shall 

(e) Co-operative societies. review user charges/ sources of 
(f) Societies or clubs set up by internal revenue generation at 

Government servants to promote least once a year and inform the 
amongst themselves social, administrative Ministry. This 
cultural and sports activities as exercise should preferably be 
recreational avenues. completed before the formulation 

Rule 229 General Principles for setting up of of Union Annual Budget. 
Autonomous Organisations referred to (vii) All Autonomous Bodies should 
under Rule 228(a): - maintain database relating to 
(i) No new autonomous institutions grants, income, expenditure, 

should be created by Ministries investment assets and employee 
or Departments without the strength in the format prescribed 
approval of the Cabinet. by the Department of 

(ii) No new autonomous institution Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
should be created by an (viii) Financial advice for 
Autonomous Body itself, the Autonomous Bodies: Every 
appraisal/approval process for autonomous organisation should 
creation of new autonomous designate an officer at 
bodies would apply in such cases appropriate level to render 
too. However, Regional financial advice whose 
Centres/Offices/Sub-Stations of concurrence should be obtained 
any autonomous body can be for sanction and incurring of 
created with prior approval of the expenditure. The financial limits 
administrative ministry in up to which such concurrence is 
consultation with Ministry of mandatory may be drawn up by 
Finance. each organisation. The Chief 

(iii) Stringent criteria should be Executive Officer of the 
followed for setting up of new Autonomous body will be 
autonomous organisations and responsible for overall financial  
the type of activities to be management of the autonomous 

 63 



bodies. wherever the output or 
(ix) Peer review of autonomous benefit of services are 

organisations: Ministry shall put utilised by others, are levied 
in place a system of external or at appropriate rates 
internal peer review of (g) the scope for maximizing 
autonomous organisations every internal resources 
three or five years depending on generation in the 
the size and nature of activity. organization so that the 
Such a review should be the dependence upon 
responsibility of the concerned Government budgetary 
administrative division of the support is minimised. 
Ministry/Department and should (x) An organisation whose 
focus, inter alia, on; performance is found to be 
(a) the objective for which the outstanding and internationally 

autonomous organisation acclaimed as a result of the 
was set up and whether review envisaged under Para (ix) 
these objectives have been above should be granted greater 
or are being achieved; autonomy and increased 

(b) whether the activities should flexibility in matters of recruitment 
be continued at all, either and financial rules thereby 
because they are no longer enabling it to devise and adopt 
relevant or have been staff structures, procedures and 
completed or if there has rules suited to improving their 
been a substantial failure in productivity. 
achievement of objectives. (xi) Autonomous organisations as 

(c) whether the nature of the also others with a budgetary 
activities is such that these support of more than Rupees five 
need to be performed only crores per annum, should be 
by an autonomous required to enter in to a 
organisation. Memorandum of Understanding 

(d) whether similar functions with the Administrative Ministry 
are also being undertaken or Department, spelling out 
by other organisations, be it clearly performance parameters, 
in the Central Government output targets in terms of details 
or State Governments or the of programme of work and 
Private Sector, and if so, qualitative improvement in 
whether there is scope for output, along with commensurate 
merging or winding up the input requirements. The output 
organisations under review. targets, given in measurable 

(e) whether the total staff units of performance, should 
complement, particularly at form the basis of budgetary 
the support level, is kept at a support extended to these 
minimum: whether the organisations. The roadmap for 
enormous strides in improved performance with clear 
information technology and milestones should form part of 
communication facilities as the MoU. 
also facilities for outsourcing (xii) Findings of the peer review 
of work on a contract basis, should be examined and put up 
have been taken into for appropriate decision to the 
account in determining staff Secretary by the concerned 
strength; and whether programme division of the 
scientific or technical Administrative Department. 
personnel are being Further releases of Grant (after 
deployed on functions which three or five years, as the case 
could well be carried out by may be), should be made 
non-scientific or non- conditional on conduct and 
technical personnel etc. decisions on the findings of such 

(f) whether user charges peer review. 
including overhead/ Rule230 (1) Principles and Procedure for award 
institutional charges / of Grants-in-aid. 
management fee in respect Any Institution or Organisation seeking 
of sponsored projects, Grants-in-aid from Government will be 

 64 



required to submit an application which Rule 230 (5) Central Autonomous Organisations 
includes all relevant information such as which receive Grants should account for 
Articles of Association, bye-laws, audited capital and revenue expenditure 
statement of accounts, sources and separately. The Government of India, 
pattern of income and expenditure etc. Ministry of Finance has formulated 
enabling the sanctioning authority to standard formats for presentation of final 
assess the suitability of the Institution or accounts, for all Central Autonomous 
Organisation seeking Grant. The Organisations. All Grant sanctioning 
application should clearly spell out the authorities should enforce the condition 
need for seeking Grant and should be of maintaining and presenting their 
submitted in such form as may be annual accounts in the standard formats 
prescribed by the sanctioning authority. on all Central Autonomous 
The Institution or Organisation seeking Organisations. 
Grants-in-aid should also certify that it Rule 230 (6) The Grants sanctioning authorities 
has not obtained or applied for grants for should not only take into account the 
the same purpose or activity from any internally generated resources while 
other Ministry or Department of the regulating the award of Grants but should 
Government of India or State consider laying down targets for internal 
Government. resources generation by the Grantee 

Rule 230 (2) In order to obviate duplication in Institutions or Organisations every 
Grants-in-aid, each Ministry or financial year, particularly where Grants 
Department should maintain a list of are given on recurring basis every year. 
institutions or organisations along with Rule 230 (7) Unspent Balances: When recurring 
details of amount and purpose of Grants Grants-in-aid are sanctioned to the same 
given to them. These details should also Institution or Organisation for the same 
be made available on the website of the purpose, the unspent balance of the 
Ministry/Department. previous Grant should be taken into 

Rule 230 (3) Award of Grants should be considered account in sanctioning the subsequent 
only on the basis of viable and specific Grant. For this purpose, the Programme 
schemes drawn up in sufficient detail by Division of Ministries/Department shall 
the institution or organisation. The budget take help of PFMS Portal to know the 
for such schemes should disclose, inter bank balance of the recipients before 
alia, the specific quantified and qualitative making each release. The instructions of 
targets likely to be attained against the Department of Expenditure regarding the 
outlay. In the cases of the schemes use of PFMS Portal for Central Sector 
where Grants are given as part of the Schemes issued from time to time shall 
expenditure on reimbursement basis (i.e. be strictly followed by all Ministries/ 
the expenditure has already been Departments. The principles of ‘just in 
incurred on approved project/scheme time release’, should be applied for 
and reimbursement from the Government releases in respect of all payments to the 
in the form of Grant/Subsidy etc. is due) extent possible. The following broad 
the same will be treated as the Central principles shall be adhered to: 
Financial Assistance (CFA) and no (i) Cash balance at a time should 
Utilization Certificate shall be required in preferably not be more than 3 
such cases of reimbursements. months of requirements 

Rule 230 (4) Recurring Grant is defined as one (ii) Funds should be released as per 
which is released periodically to the same actual requirements and that 
organization for the same purpose. Non- sanction may precede the 
recurring Grant is one time release to an release of funds, though its 
organization for a special purpose (which validity may be limited to that 
could be released in installments). Every financial year. 
order sanctioning a Grant shall indicate Rule 230 (8) All interests or other earnings against 
whether it is recurring or non-recurring Grants in aid or advances (other than 
and specify clearly the object for which it reimbursement) released to any Grantee 
is being given and the general and institution should be mandatorily remitted 
special conditions, if any, attached to the to the Consolidated Fund of India 
Grant. In the case of non-recurring immediately after finalisation of the 
Grants for specified object, the order shall accounts. Such advances should not be 
also specify the time limit within which the allowed to be adjusted against future 
Grant or each installment of it, is to be releases. 
spent.  

  

 65 



Rule 230 (9) In making Grants to Non-Government cases relaxation may be made in 
or Quasi-Government Institutions or consultation with the Ministry of 
Organisations, a condition should be laid Finance. 
down that assets acquired wholly or (ii) Grantee Institutions or 
substantially out of Government Grants, Organisations should be 
except those declared as obsolete and encouraged to take advantage of 
unserviceable or condemned in the pension or gratuity schemes 
accordance with the procedure laid down or Group Insurance Schemes or 
in the General Financial Rules, shall not house buildings loans or vehicle 
be disposed of without obtaining the prior loans schemes etc. available in 
approval of the authority which the market for employees instead 
sanctioned the Grants-in-aid. of undertaking liability on their 

Rule 230 (10) The sanctioning authority may own or Government account. 
prescribe conditions regarding quantum Rule 230 (13) The sanctioning authority, while 
and periodicity for release of Grants-in- laying down the pattern of assistance, 
aid in installments in consultation with the may decide whether the ownership of 
Financial Adviser. However, the release buildings constructed with Grants-in-aid 
of the last installment of the Annual Grant may vest with Government or the 
must be conditional upon the Grantee Grantee Institution or Organisation. 
Institutions providing reasonable Where the ownership is vested in the 
evidence of proper utilization of Government, the Grantee Institution or 
installments released earlier. In the cases Organisation may be allowed to occupy 
where Central Financial Assistance the building as a lessee. In such cases 
(CFA) has been sanctioned, the grant will suitable record of details of location, cost, 
be released in one installment upon the name of lessee and terms & conditions of 
Grantee Institutions/ Organisation lease must be maintained in the records 
providing complete evidence of achieving of the granting Ministry or Department. In 
the specified objectives and expenditure all cases of buildings constructed with 
incurred supported by Audited Statement Grants-in-aid, responsibility of 
of Expenditure. In these cases, the maintenance of such buildings shall be of 
grantee institutions will not be required to the Grantee Institution or Organisation. 
submit Utilization Certificates. Rule 230 (14) Any other special terms and 

Rule 230 (11) In order to finalize the Budgetary conditions or procedures for transaction 
Estimates of Grants in aid to the Grantee of business as Government may desire to 
Institutions, the Ministry or Department be followed by the Grantee Institution or 
should impress upon Institution or Organisation, shall be got incorporated in 
Organisation desiring Grants from the Articles of Association or bye-laws of 
Government, to submit their requirement the Institution or Organisation concerned 
with supporting details by the end of before release of Grants-in-aid. 
September in the year preceding the year Rule 230 (15) Grants-in-aid may be sanctioned to 
for which the Grants-in-aid is sought. The meet the bonafide expenditure incurred 
Ministry or Department should finalize not earlier than two years prior to the date 
their examination of the requests with the of issue of the sanction. 
utmost expedition and make the Rule 230 (16) The stipulation in regard to refund of 
necessary Budget provision where it is the un-utilised amount of Grant-in-aid 
decided to sanction Grants. The with interest thereon should be brought 
Institution or Organisation should be out clearly in the letter sanctioning the 
informed of the result of their requests by Grant as well as in the bond so required 
April of the succeeding year. to be executed. 

Rule 230 (12) Rule 230 (17) (i) As a precondition to the sanction 
(i) All Grantee Institutions or of Grants-in-aid to the agencies where: 

Organisations which receive (a) the recipient body employs 
more than fifty percent of their more than twenty persons on 
recurring expenditure in the form a regular basis and at least 
of Grants-in- aid, should fifty per cent of its recurring 
ordinarily formulate terms and expenditure is met from 
conditions of service of their Grants-in-aid from Central 
employees which are, by and Government; and 
large, not higher than those (b) the body is a registered 
applicable to similar categories of society or a co-operative 
employees in Central institution and is in receipt of a 
Government. In exceptional general purpose annual 

 66 



Grants-in-aid of Rupees consultation with Internal 
twenty lakhs and above from Finance Wing. 
the Consolidated Fund of Rule 231 (2) Before a Grant is released, the 
India; members of the Executive Committee of 

(c) the Grant sanctioning the Grantee should be asked to Execute 
authority should ensure that a Bonds in a prescribed format binding 
suitable clause is invariably themselves jointly and severally to:- 
included in the terms and (i) abide by the conditions of the 
conditions under which the Grants- in-aid by the target dates, 
Grants-in-aid are given, to if any, specified therein; and 
provide for reservation for (ii) not to divert the Grants or entrust 
Scheduled Castes and execution of the scheme or work 
Scheduled Tribes or OBC in concerned to another 
posts and services under Institution(s) or Organization(s); 
such organizations or and 
agencies. The relative (iii) abide by any other conditions 
provision may be on the specified in the agreement 
following lines: - governing the Grants-in-aid. 
“ … … … … … (Name of (iv) In the event of the Grantee failing 
Institution or Organization to comply with the conditions or 
etc.)agrees to make committing breach of the 
reservations for Scheduled conditions of the Bond, the 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes signatories to the Bond shall be 
or OBC in the posts or jointly and severally liable to 
services under its control on refund to the President of India, 
the lines indicated by the the whole or a part amount of the 
Government of India”. Grant with interest at ten percent 

(ii)  While sanctioning Grants-in- per annum thereon or the sum 
aid to Institutions or specified under the Bond. The 
Organisations referred to in stamp duty for this Bond shall be 
(a) above, the Grant borne by the Government. 
sanctioning authority should Rule 231 (3) Execution of Bond will not apply to 
keep in view the progress Quasi - Government Institutions, Central 
made by such Institutions or Autonomous Organisations and 
Organisations in employing Institutions whose budget is approved by 
Scheduled Castes and the Government 
Scheduled Tribes or OBC Rule 232 General Principles for award of 
candidates in their services. Grants-in-aid for Centrally Sponsored 

Rule 231 (1) Grants-in-aid to “Voluntary Schemes. The following principles 
Organisations” Subject to the following should be kept in view by 
terms and conditions, Grants-in-aid Ministries/Departments of the Central 
towards administrative expenditure may Government at the time of designing 
be sanctioned to voluntary organizations Centrally Sponsored Schemes for 
to ensure a certain minimum staff implementation in State Governments or 
structure and qualified personnel to Union Territories and approving and 
improve their effectiveness and expand releasing assistance to State 
their activities under the following Governments or Union Territories for 
conditions: - such schemes: - 
(i) The Grants-in-aid should not (i) Every Centrally Sponsored 

exceed twenty-five percent of Scheme should haveatime-
approved administrative bound quantifiable and 
expenditure on pay and measurable outcome targets with 
allowances of the personnel of provisions for periodic 
the voluntary organisation monitoring, mid-term evaluation 
concerned; and detailed impact studies. 

(ii) Grants-in-aid to meet (ii) The scheme should be designed 
administrative expenditure to any in consultation with States and 
private institutions other than the Union Territories. States should 
voluntary organizations should be delegated adequate powers to 
not ordinarily be sanctioned. In change the details of the 
exceptional cases such Grants schemes to suit local conditions, 
can be considered for sanction in subject to reporting such 

 67 



changes to the concerned suggestions for formulating and 
Ministry or Department. implementing future schemes. A 

(iii) Where schemes are in operation copy of the review should be 
with similar objectives targeting obtained by the Ministry 
the same population, the concerned and kept in view while 
schemes should be converged. formulating new Centrally 

(iv) To ensure monitoring and Sponsored Schemes. 
effective control over such Rule 233 Funding of Sponsored Projects or 
schemes, the number of Schemes. 
schemes should be restricted, so (i) Ministries or Departments of 
that the gain from the Government sponsor projects or 
expenditure on such schemes is schemes to be undertaken by 
maximized. The role of the Universities, Indian Institute of 
Central Ministries or Technology and other similar 
Departments should be capacity Autonomous Organisations such 
building, inter-sectoral as ICAR, CSIR, ICMR etc., the 
coordination and detailed results from which are expected 
monitoring. to be in national interest. 

(v) The release of funds to State Normally the entire expenditure 
Governments and monitoring on such projects or schemes 
further utilisation should be including capital expenditure, is 
undertaken through PFMS. The funded by the Ministry or 
Ministries or Departments should Department. The funds released 
establish a mechanism to ensure for such projects or schemes in 
that the funds earlier released one or more installments are not 
have been effectively utilised and treated as Grants-in-aid in the 
that the data and facts reported books of the implementing 
by the State Governments or agency. Apart from the 
Union Territories relating to requirement of submission of 
physical and financial technical and financial reports on 
performance are correct. Before completion of the project or 
releasing further funds, it should scheme, a stipulation should be 
also be ensured that the State made in such cases that the 
Governments or Union ownership in the physical and 
Territories have the capacity to intellectual assets created or 
actually spend the balance from acquired out of such funds shall 
the previous years and the vest in the sponsor. While the 
releases during the current year. Project or Scheme is ongoing, 

(vi) The Ministries or Departments the recipients should not treat 
should focus attention on the such assets as their own assets 
attainment of the objectives and in their Books of Accounts but 
not on expenditure only. A should disclose their holding and 
mechanism for avoiding release using such assists in the Notes to 
of large part of funds towards the Accounts specifically. 
end of the year should be (ii) On completion of the Projects or 
devised and incorporated in the Schemes and the receipt of 
Scheme design itself. technical and financial reports, 

(vii) A concurrent monitoring and the Ministries/Departments 
evaluation mechanism should be should decide and communicate 
built into the Scheme. A periodic to the implementing agencies 
review of every Centrally whether the assets should be 
Sponsored Scheme should be returned, sold or retained by 
undertaken for any required mid- them. 
course correction or changes in [Note: In relaxation of the extant 
the scheme design provisions of the rule, Scientific 

(viii) A post-completion review of Departments are allowed to 
every Centrally Sponsored extend the provisions of Rule 233 
Scheme should be undertaken (i) & (ii) to private sector / NGOs 
by the State Government(s) or who are commissioned to 
Union Territories implementing 
the scheme, highlighting the time 
and cost overruns, if any, and 

 68 



execute projects or schemes.]54 (iii) Information at column (xiii) of the 
(iii) If the assets are to be sold, the Form GFR-21 above should be 

proceeds therefrom should be used also for regulating the 
credited to the account of the subsequent Grants. 
sponsoring Department / Rule 235 Accounts of Grantee Institutions. 
Organisation. If the assets are Institutions or Organisations receiving 
allowed to be retained by the Grants should, irrespective of the amount 
Institution/ Organisation, the involved, be required to maintain 
implementing agency should subsidiary accounts of the Government 
include the assets at the book grant and furnish to the Accounts Officer 
value in their own accounts. a set of audited statement of accounts. 

Rule 234 Register of Grants. A Register of Grants These audited statements of accounts 
shall be maintained by the sanctioning should be required to be furnished after 
authority in the format given in Form GFR utilization of the Grants-in-aid or 
- 21. whenever called for. 
(i) Columns (i) to (v) of the Register Rule 236 (1) Audit of Accounts. The accounts of 

in format at Form GFR - 21 all Grantee Institutions or Organisations 
should be filled in simultaneously shall be open to inspection by the 
with the issue of the order sanctioning authority and audit, both by 
sanctioning each Grant. These the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
columns should be attested by India under the provision of CAG(DPC) 
any Gazetted Officer nominated Act 1971 and internal audit by the 
for the purpose by the Principal Accounts Office of the Ministry 
sanctioning authority. The serial or Department, whenever the Institution 
number should be recorded on or Organisation is called upon to do so 
the body of the sanction at the and a provision to this effect should 
time the item is entered in the invariably be incorporated in all orders 
Register as under: “Noted at sanctioning Grants-in-aid. 
Serial No …………………… in Rule 236 (2) 
the Register of Grants”. (i) The accounts of the Grantee 

(ii) Such a record will guard against Institution or Organisation shall 
the possibility of double payment. be audited by the Comptroller 
Columns (vi) and (vii) should be and Auditor General of India 
filled in and attested by the under Section 14 of the 
Gazetted Officer concerned as Comptroller and Auditor General 
soon as the bill is ready. The bill of India (Duties, Powers and 
should then be submitted to the Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, 
Gazetted Officer nominated to if the Grants or loans to the 
act as Drawing and Disbursing institution in a financial year are 
Officer with the register for not less than Rupees twenty- five 
signing the bill and to the lakhs and also not less than 
sanctioning authority for giving seventy-five percent of the total 
dated initials in column (viii) of expenditure of the Institution. The 
Register. It should also be the accounts may also be audited by 
duty of the sanctioning authority the Comptroller and Auditor 
to verify that the conditions, if General of India if the Grants or 
any, attached to the Grant have loans in a financial year are not 
been duly accepted by the less than Rupees one crore. 
Grantee without any reservation Where the accounts are so 
and that no other bill for the same audited by the Comptroller and 
purpose has already been paid Auditor General of India in a 
before. No bill should be signed financial year, he shall continue 
unless it has been noted in the to audit the accounts for a further 
Register of Grants against the period of two years 
relevant sanction. This will also notwithstanding that the 
facilitate watching of payments in conditions outlined above are not 
installments, if any, in the case of fulfilled. 
lump sum sanctions. (ii) Where any Grant and /or loan is 

 
54 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.No. 8(1)/2021-E.IIA dated Department of Atomic Energy, Department of Space, Ministry 
03.09.2021. The Scientific Ministries/ Departments are of Earth Sciences, Defence Research and Development 
Department of Science and Technology, Department of Bio- Organisation. 
technology, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, 

 69 



given for any specific purpose to The Utilization Certificate in respect of 
any Institution or Organisation or Grants referred to in Rule230 (10) should 
authority, not being a foreign also disclose whether the specified, 
State or international quantified and qualitative targets that 
Body/Organization, the should have been reached against the 
Comptroller and Auditor General amount utilised, were in fact reached, and 
is competent under Section 15 if not, the reasons therefor. They should 
(1) of the CAG’s (DPC) Act, 1971, contain an output based performance 
to scrutinize the procedures by assessment instead of input based 
which the sanctioning authority performance assessment. The Utilization 
satisfies itself as to the fulfillment Certificate should be submitted within 
of the conditions subject to which twelve months of the closure of the 
such Grants and/or loans were financial year by the Institution or 
given and shall, for this purpose, Organisation concerned. Receipt of such 
have right of access to the books certificate shall be scrutinised by the 
and accounts of that Institute or Ministry or Department concerned. 
Organisation or authority. Where such certificate is not received 

Rule 236 (3) In all other cases, the Institution or from the Grantee within the prescribed 
Organisation shall get its accounts time, the Ministry or Department will be at 
audited from Chartered Accountants of its liberty to blacklist such Institution or 
own choice. Organisation from any future grant, 

Rule 236 (4) Where the Comptroller and Auditor subsidy or other type of financial support 
General of India is the sole auditor for a from the Government. 
local Body or Institution, auditing charges Rule 238 (2) In respect of recurring Grants, Ministry 
will be payable by the auditee Institution or Department concerned should release 
in full unless specifically waived by any amount sanctioned for the 
Government subsequent financial year only after 

Rule 237 Time Schedule for submission of Utilization Certificate on provisional basis 
annual accounts. The dates prescribed in respect of Grants of preceding financial 
for submission of the annual accounts for year is submitted. Release of Grants-in-
Audit leading to the issue of Audit aid in excess of seventy five per cent of 
Certificate by the Comptroller and Auditor the total amount sanctioned for the 
General of India and for submission of subsequent financial year shall be done 
annual report and audited accounts to the only after utilisation certificate and the 
nodal Ministry for timely submission to annual audited statement relating to 
the Parliament are listed below:- Grants-in-aid released in the preceding 
(i) Approved and authenticated year are submitted to the satisfaction of 

annual accounts to be made the Ministry/Department concerned. 
available by the Autonomous Reports submitted by the Internal Audit 
Body to the concerned Audit parties of the Ministry or Department and 
Office and commencement of Inspection Reports received from Indian 
audit of annual accounts-30th Audit and Accounts Department and the 
June performance reports if any received for 

(ii) Issue of the final SAR in English the third and fourth quarter in the year 
version with audit certificate to should also be looked into while 
Autonomous Body/ Government sanctioning further Grants. 
concerned-31st October [Note: As a special measure Scientific  

(iii) Submission of the Annual Report Departments are permitted to release 
and Audited Accounts to the subsequent Grants in aid on receipt of 
Nodal for it to be laid on the Table UCs confirming utilization of 75% of the 
of the Parliament-31st December total value of previous Grant(s) from a 

Rule 238 (1) Utilization Certificates. In respect of Grantee Body.]55 
non-recurring Grants to an Institution or Rule 238 (3) Utilization certificates need not be 
Organisation, a certificate of actual furnished in cases where the Grants-in-
utilization of the Grants received for the aid / CFA are being made as 
purpose for which it was sanctioned in reimbursement of expenditure already 
Form GFR 12-A, should be insisted upon incurred on the basis of duly audited 
in the order sanctioning the Grants-in-aid. accounts. In such cases the sanction 

 
55 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.No. 1(10)/E.IIA/2015 dated Department of Atomic Energy, Department of Space, Ministry 
31.07.2017. The Scientific Ministries/ Departments are of Earth Sciences, Defence Research and Development 
Department of Science and Technology, Department of Bio- Organisation.  
technology, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, 

 70 



letters should specify clearly that the Rule 239 State Government to submit 
Utilization Certificates will not be Utilization Certificate for Grants-in-aid 
necessary. relating to Scheme. When Central 

Rule 238 (4) In respect of Central Autonomous Grants are given to State Governments 
Organisations, the Utilization Certificate for implementation of Central Scheme, 
shall disclose separately the annual Utilization Certificate in format GFR 12-C 
expenditure incurred and the funds given may be submitted by the State 
to suppliers of stores and assets, to Government in respect of the Scheme. 
construction agencies, to staff for (House The UC should be counter-signed by the 
Building and Purchase of conveyance) Administrative Secretary of the Division 
which do not constitute expenditure at regulating the Scheme/Finance 
that stage but have been met out of Secretary. 
Grants and are pending adjustments. Rule 240 State Government to submit 
These shall be treated as unutilized Utilization Certificate when 
Grants allowed to be carried forward. expenditure incurred through local 
While recording the Grants in the bodies. When Central Grants are given 
subsequent year the amount carried to State Governments for expenditure to 
forward shall be taken into account. be incurred by them through local bodies 

Rule 238 (5) In the case of Private and Voluntary or private institutions, the Utilization 
Organizations receiving recurring Grants- Certificates should be furnished by the 
in-aid from Rupees ten lakhs to less than State Government concerned. 
Rupees fifty lakhs, all the Ministries or Rule 241 Utilisation Certificate in case of Direct 
Departments of Government of India Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme. In 
should include in their Annual Report a case of the schemes covered under 
statement showing the quantum of funds Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT), where the 
provided to each of those organizations fund flow is directly from the Central 
and the purpose for which they were Government to the beneficiaries, the 
utilized, for the information of Parliament. intimation from the bank/National 
The Annual Reports and accounts of Payments Corporation of India (Aadhaar 
Private and Voluntary Organizations Payment Bridge) regarding deposit of the 
receiving recurring Grants-in-aid to the funds in the beneficiaries’ bank accounts, 
tune of Rupees fifty lakhs and above generated as per procedure prescribed 
should be laid on the Table of the House by the Controller General of Accounts, 
within nine months of the close of the may be treated as a Utilization Certificate. 
succeeding financial year of the Grantee The Ministry/Department releasing the 
Organisations. Grant should keep proper record and 

Rule 238 (6) In the case of organizations receiving accounts relating to such direct releases 
one-time assistance or non-recurring under DBT to the beneficiaries bank 
Grants as Grants-in-aid from Rupees ten accounts. 
lakhs to Rupees five crore, all Ministries Rule 242 (1) Performance parameters. 
or Departments of Government of India Performance parameters should be 
should include in their Annual Reports, clearly set to allow better oversight of the 
statements showing the quantum of Autonomous Body. 
funds provided to each of these Rule 242 (2) Submission of Achievement-cum-
organizations and the purpose for which Performance Reports. 
the funds were utilized, for the (i) The Grantee Institutions or 
information of Parliament. The Annual Organisations should be required 
Reports and Audited Accounts of Private to submit performance cum 
and Voluntary Organizations or societies achievement reports soon after 
registered under the Registration of the end of the financial year, and 
Societies Act, 1860, receiving one-time in any case, not later than six 
assistance/non-recurring Grants of months after the close of the 
Rupees Five Crore and above should financial year. 
also be laid on the Table of the House, (ii) In regard to non-recurring Grants 
within nine months of the close of the such as those meant for 
succeeding financial year of the grantee celebration of anniversaries, 
Organisations. [Note: Increase in monetary conduct of special tours and 
ceiling in laying of Annual Reports and Audited maintenance Grants for 
Accounts of various organisations receiving funds education, performance- cum- 
from Govt. of India]56. 

 
56 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.No.8(5)/2020-E.IIA dated 09.10.2020 
 

 71 



achievement reports need not be aid are for Rupees five crore or 
obtained. more in the case of non-recurring 

(iii) In the case of recurring Grants, grants and Rupees fifty lakhs or 
submission of achievement-cum- more in the case of recurring 
performance reports should grants, the Ministry or 
usually be insisted upon in all Departments of the Central 
cases. However, in the case of Government should include in 
Grants-in-aid not exceeding their Annual Report a review of 
Rupees twenty five lakhs, the the utilization of the Grants- in- 
sanctioning authority may aid individually, specifying in 
dispense with the submission of detail the achievements vis-à-vis 
performance- cum- achievement the amount spent, the purpose 
reports and should, in that event, and destination of Grants. 
refer to the Utilization Certificates [Note: Increase in monetary ceiling in 

and other information available laying of Annual Reports and Audited 
Accounts of various organisations 

with it to decide whether or not 
receiving funds from Govt. of India]57. 

the Grants-in- aid should (v) Where the accounts of the 
continue to be given. Grantee Institutions or 

(iv) (a) The Annual Reports and 
Organisations are audited by the 

Audited Statements of Accounts 
CAG of India copies of the 

of Autonomous Organisations performance-cum-achievement 
receiving grants of Rupees Two reports, furnished by the grantee 
crore and above are required to Institution to the Administrative 
be laid on the table of the 

Ministry or sanctioning authority 
Parliament. In such cases, the 

should be made available to 
Ministries or Departments of audit. In other cases copies of 
Central Government need not such reports, received by the 
incorporate performance-cum- Departments of the Central 
achievement reports in the Government or the sanctioning 
Annual Reports. 

authority should be made 
(aa)In cases where these 

available to audit when local 
Autonomous Organisations are audit of such Grants-in-aid in the 
getting funds less than Rupees Administrative Ministry or 
two crore, all the Departments of Department or sanctioning 
Central Government should authority is conducted or when it 
include in their Annual Report a 

is called for by the Accountant 
Statement showing the quantum 

General. 
of funds provided to each of Rule 243 Discretionary Grants. When an 
these organisations and the allotment for Discretionary Grants is 
purpose for which they were placed at the disposal of a particular 
utilized for the information of the 

authority, the expenditure from such 
Parliament. 

Grants shall be regulated by general or 
 special orders of the competent authority 
(b) In all other cases, if the specifying the object for which the Grants 
Grants-in- aid (a) exceed can be made and any other condition(s) 
Rupees ten lakhs but less than that shall apply to them. Such 
rupees fifty lakhs in the case of 

Discretionary Grants must be non-
recurring grants and (b) 

recurring and not involve any future 
exceed Rupees ten lakh but commitment. 
less than Rupees five crore in Rule 244 Other Grants. Grants, subventions, etc., 
the case of non-recurring including Grants to States other than 
grants, the Ministry or those dealt with in the foregoing rules, 
Departments of the Central 

shall be made under special orders of 
Government should include a 

Government. 
statement in their Annual Report Rule 245 (1)  Regulation of recurring Grants-in-aid 
of their own assessment of the for Government employees’ welfare :– 
achievements or performance of a. Grants-in-aid for provision of 
the Institution or Organisations. amenities or of recreational or 
(c)In cases where the Grants-in-

 
57 Inserted vide DoE OM No. F.No.8(5)/2020-E.IIA  
Dated 09.10.2020 
 

 72 



welfare facilities to the staff of the amenities is given below: 
offices of the Government are i. Articles of sports – Outdoor 
regulated under orders of the and indoor games 
Ministry of Home Affairs issued from equipment 
time to time. The admissibility of the ii. Cost of uniforms, etc., 
Grants-in-aid for the welfare of the supplied to teams of players. 
employees of the Government iii. Magazines and periodicals. 
should be regulated in the following iv. Entry fee for tournaments 
manner :- v. Hiring of playgrounds 

(i) The Grant in aid will be admissible vi. Hiring and repair for 
on the basis of the total strength furniture, etc., 
borne on the regular strength of an vii. Purchase of furniture. 
organization, i.e., Ministry or viii. Conveyance expenses 
Department, etc., and its Attached incurred locally. 
and Subordinate Offices and such ix. Entertainments. 
statutory bodies whose budget x. Prizes. 
forms part of Consolidated Fund of xi. Film shows. 
India, irrespective of the fact whether xii. Hiring of accommodation for 
any individual is a member of the Club/Association, etc. 
staff club, etc., or not. However, xiii. Cultural, Sports and 
Grant-in- aid in respect of Gazetted Physical development 
Officers will be admissible only to programme(s). 
that Ministry or Department or Office xiv. Inter-Ministerial meets. 
where membership of recreation xv. Inter-Departmental meets 
club is open to such officers. (2) A maximum one time Grant of 
Staff paid from contingencies, work- Rupees fifty thousand may be 
charged staff etc., will not be taken sanctioned for setting up of a 
into calculation for this purpose. Recreation Club. 
Staff eligible for similar concession (3) Grants-in-aid to the Ministry or 
under some other rule or statutory Departments of the Central 
provision, e.g., industrial workers will Government and their Attached 
also not be covered by these orders. and Subordinate Offices will be 

(ii) Amounts of Grants-in-aid. (a) The allocated by the concerned 
rate of the Grant-in-aid will be Ministry or Department on receipt 
Rupees fifty per head per annum. In of formal requests in the 
addition to this, an additional Grant- prescribed manner. For the 
in-aid up to Rupees twenty-five per purposes of these Grants-in-aid, 
head per annum to match the the Departments of the Central 
subscriptions collected during the Government and their attached 
previous financial year by the and Subordinate Offices will be 
existing staff clubs will be treated as a single unit. It will be 
admissible. In the case of staff clubs the responsibility of that Ministry or 
which are started during the financial Department to distribute the 
year in which Grant-in-aid is to be amount further to its Attached and 
given, an additional matching Subordinate Offices and to their 
grants- in-aid up to Rupees twenty- different clubs. The accounts of 
five per head per annum, to match these clubs for the preceding year 
the subscription collected by such duly audited by an Internal Auditor 
clubs up to the date on which the should be obtained immediately 
proposal for the Grant is mooted, after the close of the financial year 
may be sanctioned. The total in any case by the thirtieth April by 
strength of the eligible staff will be the Ministry or Department before 
that existing on the thirty-first March allocating funds for the next 
of the previous financial year or that financial year. 
on the date on which proposal for (4) Grants-in-aid for the provision of 
Grant is mooted in the case of new amenities or recreational or 
staff clubs above rates, as revised welfare facilities to the staff of the 
from time to time will apply. Indian Audit and Accounts 

(iii) An illustrative list of items on which Department are regulated by 
expenditure can be incurred out of separate orders 
Grants-in-aid sanctioned by  
Government for provision of  

 73 



II. LOANS the date on which the loan is 
 completely drawn or declared by 
Rule 246 The rules in this Section shall be competent authority to be closed. 

observed by all authorities competent to (iii) The repayment of loans shall be 
sanction loans of public moneys to State effected by installments, which 
Governments, Local Administrations of shall ordinarily be fixed on annual 
Union Territories, local bodies, foreign basis, and with due dates of 
Government on specific recommendation payment being specially 
of State Government, Government prescribed. 
institutions and other Government (iv) Any installment paid before its 
bodies. due date may be taken entirely 

Rule 247 (1)Powers and Procedure for sanction towards the principal, provided it 
of loans. The powers of Departments of is accompanied by payment 
the Central Government and toward interest due up-to-date of 
Administrators as well as other actual payment of installment; if 
subordinate authorities to sanction loans not, the amount of the installment 
are given in the Delegation of Financial shall first be adjusted towards the 
Powers Rules and other general and interest due for preceding and 
special orders issued under that rule. current periods and the balance, 

Rule247 (2)Nodal Division in Ministry of if any, shall alone be applied 
Finance. The Budget Division, towards the principal. If, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry however, the payment of the 
of Finance shall be the nodal division in installment is in advance of the 
the Ministry of Finance to finalise terms due date by fourteen days or 
and conditions of loans by the Central less, interest for the full period 
Government. (half-year or full year, as the case 

Rule 248 All sanctions of loans issued by a may be) shall be payable. 
Department of Central Government or an (v) When the due date of repayment 
Administrator of Union Territory in of any installment of principal or 
exercise of their powers under the interest falls on a Sunday or a 
relevant provision of Delegation of public holiday, the payment 
Financial Powers Rules shall include a made on the next working day 
certificate to the effect that the same is in following the Sunday or the 
accordance with the rules or principles public holiday, shall be regarded 
prescribed by the Ministry of Finance and as payment on the due date and 
that the rate of interest on the loan and no interest shall be charged for 
the period of repayment thereof have the day or days by which the 
been fixed with the approval of that recovery is so postponed. 
Ministry. Exception. If an installment of 

Rule 249 (1) All sanctions to loans shall be subject principal or interest is payable on 
to the Delegation of Financial Powers the thirty-first March of a year, 
Rules and shall specify the terms and and if that day happens to be a 
conditions relating to them including the public holiday the recoveries 
terms and conditions of their repayment shall be made on the immediately 
and payment of interest. preceding working day. In case, 

Rule 249 (2) Borrowers shall be required to adhere the due date for the repayment of 
strictly to the terms settled for the loans a loan or payment of interest falls 
made to them. Modifications of these on a holiday observed by the 
terms can be made subsequently only for Reserve Bank of India, at which 
very special reasons and after seeking the effective credit of the same is 
prior concurrence of Ministry of Finance. to take place this shall be shifted 

Rule 250 (1) General conditions for regulating to the next working day, except 
all loans : All loans shall be regulated by when the due date is thirty-first 
the following general conditions :- March. 
(i) A specific term shall be fixed (vi) The payment of interest and the 

which shall be as short as repayment of principal of a loan 
possible, within which each loan are always to be made with 
has to be fully repaid with interest reference to the calendar date on 
due. The terms may, in very which the loan in question is paid. 
special cases, extend to thirty However, where payment of 
years. installment is in advance of the 

(ii) The term is to be calculated from due date by fourteen days or 

 74 



less, interest for the full year or annual interest as also 
half year (depending on the repayment of installment of 
prescribed mode of recovery) principal in respect of such 
shall be charged thereon. In the loans shall fall due on the 
case of a loan sanctioned by the thirty-first March of the 
Central Government to a State succeeding years and not 
Government on or before thirty- on the anniversaries of the 
first March of a year, which is calendar date in April on 
adjusted in the books of the which inter- Governmental 
Reserve Bank of India in the adjustment on account of 
month of April but in the accounts such loans was carried out 
of the previous year the in the books of the Reserve 
installment of principal and/or Bank of India. 
interest shall fall due for payment (b) Where no monetary 
on the thirty- first March of the settlement is involved. In 
succeeding year and not on the regard to cases where 
anniversaries of the calendar adjustment in the books of 
date in April on which the inter- the Accounts Offices are 
Governmental adjustment was only involved and actual 
carried out. credit through the Reserve 

(vii) The date of drawal of a loan by a Bank of India is not 
State Government shall be necessary, the last date of 
determined as indicated below – the month of account in 
(a) When monetary which the adjustment is 

settlement is involved- effected shall be taken as 
Normally the calendar date the date of drawal of loan for 
on which amount of a loan is purposes of repayment and 
actually credited to the charging interest. 
account of the State (viii) In order to avoid any default in 
Government by the Reserve the payment of loan, the Principal 
Bank is to be treated as the Accounts Officers or Pay and 
date of its drawal. Accounts Officers who maintain 
This position shall also hold the detailed accounts of loans, 
in cases where adjustment shall issue notices in Form GFR-
in accounts is made in one 19 to the loanees (other than 
month but date of State and Union Territory 
adjustment in the books of Governments) i.e. Public Sector 
the Reserve Bank of India Undertakings, statutory bodies 
falls in the following and Government institutions etc., 
calendar month. The say, a month in advance of the 
calendar date on which the due date for the repayment of 
credit is actually afforded to any instalment of the principal 
the State Government in the and/ or interest thereon. 
books of the Reserve Bank However, omission to give notice 
of India in such cases shall does not give the loanees any 
be treated as the date of its claim to exemption from the 
drawal. consequences of default in the 
Exception. An exception to repayment of the principal and/or 
this arrangement is in the interest thereon. 
case of loans for which Rule 250 (2) Before sanctioning a loan to private 
credit is afforded to the Institutions the lending Ministry or 
recipient State Government Department shall examine the financial 
in the month of April by the health and managerial ability of such 
Reserve Bank of India but in institutes. 
the accounts of previous Rule 250 (3) (i) Before considering a loan 
year. In such cases, a loan application from parties other than State 
shall be deemed to have Governments and Local Administrations 
been paid on the thirty-first of Union Territories, the following 
March of the financial year in requirements shall be fulfilled:- 
the accounts for which the (a) it shall be seen that there is 
payment is adjusted. adequate budget provision; 
Consequently, payment of (b) it shall be seen whether the 

 75 



grant of the loan is in is at least thirty-three and one-third per 
accordance with approved cent. above the amount of the loan. If 
Government policy and possible, an independent valuation of the 
accepted patterns of security offered shall be obtained. The 
assistance. applicant for the loan must satisfy both 

(ii)Before approving the loan, the the criteria for financial soundness and 
applicant shall be asked to furnish the adequacy of security before a loan is 
following materials and information:- sanctioned. 

(a) copies of profit and loss (or (iv) In the case of Institutions which 
income and expenditure) receive Grants-in-aid from Government 
accounts and balance sheets to meet a part of their deficits and the 
for the last 3 years; balance is met by the State Government 

(b) the main sources of income and the Trustees of Management, it shall 
and how the loan is proposed be ensured– 
to be repaid within the (a) that in computing the deficit 
stipulated period; for purpose of the Grant-in-

(c) the security proposed to be aid, the income from the 
offered for the loan together scheme, if any, earmarked for 
with a valuation of the security servicing the loan and the 
offered by an independent instalment of repayment of 
authority and a certificate to the loan and interest (if any) is  
the effect that the asset not included; 
offered as security is not (b) that as far as possible, the 
already encumbered. scheme for which the loan is 

(d) Details of loan or loans taken given is self-financing and 
from the Central Government does not throw an additional 
or a State Government in the burden on the general income 
past, indicating amount, of the institutions, e.g., in the 
purpose, rate of interest, case of hostels for colleges 
stipulated period of that the rents proposed are 
repayment, date of original adequate; 
loan and amount outstanding (c) the Institution produces an 
against the loan(s) on the date undertaking from the State 
of the application and the Government or the 
assets, if any, given as Management that any 
security; shortfall towards repayment 

(e) a complete list of all other of the loan and interest shall 
loans, outstanding on the date be made good by it. In the 
of application and the assets latter case the financial 
given as security against position of the Management 
them; (Trust) shall be investigated 

(f) the purpose for which the loan after calling for information on 
is proposed to be utilized and the lines of Rule 250. (3) (i) 
the economics of the scheme. above. 

NOTE. Where the loan is to be given to (v) Ministries or Departments of the 
Government institution on the strength of Central Government shall lay down a 
a guarantee given by the trust managing procedure for periodical review of the old 
it, similar information should be called for loans so that prompt action can be taken, 
in respect of the trust also. if necessary, for enforcing regular 
(iii)On receipt of the information called for payments. 
as mentioned in (ii) above, confidential Rule 250 (4) The detailed procedure to be followed 
enquiries shall be made from the other in connection with the Grant of loans to 
Departments of the Central Government local bodies shall be regulated by the 
or State Governments from which the provisions of the Local Authorities Loans 
party has taken loans, to judge the Act and other special Acts and by rules 
performance in regard to the previous made thereunder. 
loans. If the replies indicate that the Rule 251 (1) Interest on Loans. 
performance was not satisfactory, the Interest shall be charged at the rate 
loan shall be refused. It must be analysed prescribed by the Government for any 
that the financial position of the party is particular loan or for the class of loans 
sound. It shall also be ensured that the concerned. 
security offered is adequate and its value Rule 251 (2) A loan shall bear interest for the day 

 76 



of payment but not for the day of in all such agreements enabling 
repayment. Interest for any shorter period Government at any time to call for 
than a complete year shall be calculated accounts of the applicant relating 
as follows, unless any other method of to any accounting year with power 
calculation is prescribed in any particular to depute an officer specially 
case or class of cases. authorized for this purpose to 
Number of days X Yearly rate of interest  inspect the applicant’s books, if 
------------------------------------------------- necessary. 
365 (366 in case of a leap year) (ii) A written undertaking in Form GFR 

Rule 252 (1) Procedure to be followed for 15 shall be obtained from a wholly 
recovery of loans and interest thereon Government-owned company at 
and Grant of moratorium. The the time of sanctioning the loan. 
instructions issued by the Ministry of The sanction shall specifically 
Finance from time to time prescribing the state that such an undertaking 
interest rates and other terms and would be obtained from the loanee 
conditions of loans to State and Union before the drawal of the amount of 
Territory Governments, Local Bodies, loan and a certificate that the 
Statutory Corporations, financial, undertaking has been obtained, 
industrial and commercial undertakings in shall be recorded by the Drawing 
the Public Sector shall be strictly Officer of the office of the 
followed. sanctioning authority in the bill for 

Rule 252 (2) The recovery of loans shall ordinarily drawal of the amount of loan. The 
be effected in annual equal installments sanction in respect of loans to 
of principal together with interest due on other organizations, where a 
the outstanding amount of principal from formal agreement is required to be 
time to time. The repayment and interest executed, shall also be issued in 
installments may be rounded off to the the same manner. 
nearest rupee subject to final adjustment Rule 254 Undertaking to be obtained from 
at the time of payment of last installment wholly - owned Government 
of principal and/or interest. Companies. 

Rule 252 (3) A suitable period of moratorium In the case of loans to wholly-owned 
towards repayment might be agreed to in Government Companies, a written 
individual cases having regard to the undertaking to the effect that the fixed 
projects for which the loans are to be assets of the company shall not be 
utilized. However, no moratorium shall hypothecated without prior approval of 
ordinarily be allowed in respect of interest the Government shall be obtained in 
payable on loans. Form GFR 32. No stamp duty need be 

Rule 253 (1) Loans to State and Union Territory paid on these written undertakings. 
Governments, Local Bodies, Statutory Rule255 Loans to parties other than State 
Corporations, Public Sector Governments, wholly owned Government 
Undertakings, etc. Loans shall ordinarily Companies and Local Administration of 
be sanctioned at the normal rates of Union Territories shall be sanctioned only 
interest prescribed by Government for the against adequate security. The security 
particular category of the loanee. In to be taken shall ordinarily be at least 
cases where the normal rate is thirty- three and one-third per cent. more 
considered too high and a concession is than the amount of the loan. However, a 
justified, it shall take the form of direct competent authority may accept security 
subsidy debitable to the grants of the of less value for adequate reasons to be 
sanctioning authority. In such cases recorded. 
interest shall, however, be paid by the Rule 256  (1) Submission of Utilization 
borrower in the first instance at the Certificate, Reports, Statements, etc. 
normal rates and subsidy shall be In cases in which conditions are attached 
claimed separately. to the utilization of loan, either in the 

Rule 253 (2) Agreements and other shape of the specification of the particular 
documentation. objects on or the time within which the 
(i) In the case of loans to parties other money must be spent or otherwise, the 

than State Governments and authority competent to sanction the loan 
wholly owned Government shall be primarily responsible for 
Companies, a loan agreement certifying to the Accounts Officer where 
specifying all the terms and necessary, the fulfillment of the 
conditions shall be executed. A conditions attaching to the loan, unless 
clause shall invariably be inserted there is any special rule or order to the 

 77 



contrary. The loans sanctioned to the Departmental authorities, a 
State Governments and the Local consolidated Utilization 
Administration of Union Territories shall Certificate shall be furnished to 
not, however, come within the purview of Audit by the 
this rule. Ministries/Departments 

Rule 256 (2) sanctioning the loans to 
(i) The certificate referred to in Rule Institutions / Organisations for 

256above shall be furnished as in the total amount of the loans 
Form GFR 12-B and at such disbursed during each year for 
intervals as maybe agreed to different purposes including the 
between the Audit Officer and/or loans sanctioned by their 
the Accounts Officer, as the case subordinate officers. This 
may be, and the Ministry or certificate shall not cover the 
Department concerned. Before loans to individuals for which 
recording the certificate, the Utilization Certificates need not 
certifying officer shall take steps be furnished to the Accounts 
to satisfy himself that the Officer. The Certificate shall 
conditions, on which the loan was indicate the year-wise and 
sanctioned, have been or are object-wise break-up of loans 
being fulfilled. For this purpose, disbursed and the loans for which 
he may require the submission to Utilizations Certificates are 
him at suitable intervals of such furnished. The utilization 
reports, statements, etc., which certificate shall also show the 
shall establish the utilization of loans disbursed separately for 
loan for the purpose for which it each sub-head of account to 
was sanctioned. The loanee facilitate verification by the 
institution may also be required Accounts Officer. 
to furnish a certificate from its (v) The Utilization Certificates shall 
Auditors that the conditions be furnished within a ‘reasonable 
attaching to the loan have been time’ after the loan is paid to the 
or are being fulfilled. The institutions. The Department of 
certificate shall give details of the Central Government shall 
breaches, if any, of those prescribe, in consultation with the 
conditions. Ministry of Finance, target dates 

(ii) A Certificate of Utilization of the for the submission of the 
loan shall be furnished to the Utilization Certificates by the 
Accounts Officer in every case of Department concerned to the 
loan made for specific purposes, Accounts Officer. The target date 
even if of the any conditions is not shall, as far as possible, be not 
specifically attached to the grant. later than eighteen months from 
Such certificates are not, the date of sanction of the loan. 
however, necessary in cases (vi) In respect of loans, the detailed 
where loans are sanctioned not accounts of which are maintained 
for any specific purpose or object by Departmental Officers and 
but take the shape of a temporary where consolidated Utilization 
financial aid or where the loans Certificates are to be furnished to 
have been sanctioned to the Accounts Officer, the period of 18 
Public Sector Undertakings months shall be reckoned from 
intended for financing of their the expiry of the financial year in 
approved capital outlays. The which the loans are disbursed. 
repayment of loan, however, has The consolidated Utilization 
to be watched in the usual Certificates in respect of such 
manner. loans paid each year shall, 

(iii) In respect of loans the detailed therefore, be furnished not later 
accounts of which are maintained than September of the second 
in the Audit Offices, the succeeding financial year. 
authorities sanctioning the loan (vii) The due dates for submission of 
shall furnish the Utilization the Utilization Certificates shall 
Certificate in respect of each be specified in the letter of 
individual case. sanction for loan. The target date 

(iv) Where the detailed accounts of as specified shall be rigidly 
the loans are maintained bythe enforced and extension shall only 

 78 



be allowed in very exceptional sanctions in favour of State or Union 
circumstances in consultation Territory Governments and the loan 
with the Ministry of Finance sanctions or undertakings or agreements 
under intimation to the Audit in case of wholly Government owned 
Officer and/or the Accounts companies or Public Sector Undertakings 
Officer, as the case may be. No shall invariably include provision for the 
further loans shall be sanctioned levy of penal interest on overdue 
unless the sanctioning authorities installments of interest or principal and 
are satisfied about the proper interest. The loan sanctions and 
utilization of the earlier loan agreements in all other cases shall 
sanctioned to an Institution, etc. invariably stipulate a higher rate of 

Rule 257 Installments of Loans. When a loan of interest and provide for lower rate of 
public money is taken out in installments, interest in the case of punctual payments. 
each installment of the loan so drawn The penal or the higher rate of interest, 
shall be treated as a separate loan for as the case may be, shall not, except 
purposes of repayment of principal and under special orders of Government, be 
payment of interest thereon except where less than two and half per cent per annum 
the various installments drawn during a above the normal rate of interest 
financial year are, for this purpose, prescribed by Government from time to 
allowed to be consolidated into a single time for the loans advanced. 
loan as at the end of that particular Rule 258 (2) Any default in the payment of interest 
financial year. In the latter event, simple upon a loan or in the repayment of 
interest at the prescribed rate on the principal, shall be promptly reported by 
various loan installments from the date of the Accounts Officer, to the authority 
drawal of each installment to the date of which sanctioned the loan. The 
their consolidation shall be separately responsibility of the Accounts Officer, 
payable by the borrower. Repayment of under this rule refers only to the loans, the 
each loan or the consolidated loan, as the detailed accounts for which are kept by 
case may be, and the payment of interest him. 
thereon shall be arranged by the Rule 258 (3) Procedure to be followed in case of 
borrower annually on or before the defaults in repayment of interest free 
anniversary date of drawal or loans or loans sanctioned at 
consolidation of the loan in such number concessional rates of interest: 
of installments as the sanctioning (i) In the case of grant of interest 
authority may prescribe. The sanctioning free loans e.g., loans to technical 
authority may allow, in deserving cases a educational institutions for 
moratorium towards repayment of construction of hostels, prompt 
principal but not for the payment of repayment shall be made a 
interest. Should it appear that there is an condition for the grant of interest 
undue delay on the part of the debtor in free loans. The sanction letter in 
taking out the last installment of a loan the such cases shall provide that in 
authority sanctioning the loan may at any the event of any default in 
time declare that loan closed, and order repayment, interest at rates 
repayment of capital to begin. The prescribed by Government from 
Accounts Officer shall bring to notice any time to time will be chargeable on 
delay that appears to him to require this the loans. 
remedy and he shall take this step (ii) In the case of loans sanctioned at 
whether or not there are any dates fixed concessional rates of interest the 
for taking of installments. difference between the normal 
NOTE1. These instructions are rate and concessional rate), shall 
applicable mutatis mutandis to loans, the be made conditional upon prompt 
repayments of which are made by other repayments of principal and 
than annual installments. payment of interest thereon by 
NOTE 2. It must be remembered that the the entity concerned. 
calculation fixing the amount of equal (iii) In the cases where in addition to 
periodical installments, by which a loan is interest free loans, subsidy is 
repaid with interest, presupposes also provided to meet running 
punctual payment of the installment and expenses the sanction letter shall 
that, if any installment is not punctually provide that in the event of any 
repaid, the interest amount shall need to default in repayment, the 
be recalculated. defaulted dues would be 

Rule 258 (1) Defaults in Payment. The loan recovered out of the subsidy 

 79 



payable. Accounts Office, the statement shall 
 contain departmental authority-wise 
 aggregate balances of outstanding loans. 
Rule 258 (4) On receipt of a report of default Rule 263 (1) Review of Annual Statements with 

referred to in sub-rule (2) above, the a view to enforce repayments of the 
authority concerned shall immediately principal and interest due. 
take steps to get the default remedied The Administrative Ministries shall keep 
and also consider enforcement of penal watch over the receipt of the Annual 
or higher rate of interest on the overdue Statements in Form GFR 20 regularly 
amounts. Where the sanctioning from the Accounts Officer and conduct a 
authority is satisfied, having regard to the close review of the cases of defaults in 
circumstances of the case, that penal or repayment of the installments of principal 
higher interest need not be recovered, and/or interest due, as revealed from 
the borrower shall ordinarily be asked to these Annual Statements and take 
pay interest, at the normal rate prescribed suitable measures for enforcing 
in the loan sanction, on the overdue repayments of the principal and interest 
amount (of principal and/or interest) from due. If these statements are not received 
the due date of payment up to the date of in time, the Accounts Officer shall be 
settlement of the default. The recovery of reminded promptly. To facilitate a proper 
additional interest shall not be waived review of the position of outstanding 
except in special circumstances or where loans, the Ministries may also arrange to 
the period of defaults is very short, e.g., a maintain centrally a list of all sanctions 
few days. issued relating to loans advanced to 

Rule 259 Irrecoverable Loans. A competent State Governments and other entities. 
authority, after prior approval of the Rule 263 (2) Submission of Annual Assessment 
Ministry of Finance may remit or write off Report. 
any loans owing to their irrecoverability or A copy of Annual Assessment Report on 
otherwise. status of all outstanding loans, including 

Rule 260 Accounts and Control. Subject to such timely and accurate payment of principal 
general or specific directions as may be and interest due, shall be submitted by 
given by the Comptroller and Auditor- the Financial Advisor of the 
General in this behalf, detailed accounts Administrative Ministry concerned to the 
of loans to Institutions and Organizations, Ministry of Finance by 30th June of each 
etc., shall be maintained by the Accounts financial year. 
Officer who shall watch their recovery   
and see that the conditions attached to 
each loan are fulfilled. 

Rule 261  The instructions contained in this Chapter 
relating to cost of audit of Grants-in-aid 
are applicable Mutatis mutandis in the 
case of loans as well. 

Rule 262 Annual Returns. 
Each Principal Accounts Officer shall 
submit to the concerned Ministry or 
Department of Government, a statement 
in Form GFR 13 showing the details of 
outstanding Central Loans borne on his 
books as on thirty-first March each year. 
This statement shall be submitted not 
later than the following thirtieth 
September and shall indicate the 
aggregate of outstanding balance of 
loans, details of defaults, if any, in 
repayment of principal and/ or interest 
and the earliest period to which the 
default pertains, against each State or 
Union Territory Government, foreign 
Government, Railway or Department of 
Posts funds, Central Public Sector and 
other Government Institutions etc. 
Where, however, detailed accounts are 
not required to be maintained by the 

 80 



Ch.-10 - BUDGETING AND ACCOUNTING OF  
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 

 
Rule 264 (1) Implementation of Projects or external sources shall be accounted for 

Schemes through external aid receipt. only by the office of Controller of Aid 
The projects or schemes of the Accounts and Audit, Department of 
Government of India to be implemented Economic Affairs. 
through external aid receipt from Rule 267 Procedure for withdrawal. The 
multilateral or bilateral funding agencies concerned administrative Ministries or 
shall be shown in the budget proposals Departments shall be required to make 
approved annually by the Parliament. provision of funds under the relevant 

Rule 264 (2) The external aid comes from bilateral head of account as ‘External Aided 
and multilateral sources as follows: Component’ in their Detailed Demands 
(i) Bilateral funding to finance for Grants for release of external aid 

specific project(s) by the funding amounts during the year to the respective 
agency(ies) under Government- Project Implementing Agencies. There 
to-Government agreement(s); are mainly two procedures laid down for 
and, withdrawal of funds from the loan or grant 

(ii) Multi-lateral funding by Multi- account: 
Lateral Funding Agencies, such Rule 267 (1) Reimbursement procedure. Under 
as the World Bank under the reimbursement procedure the Project 
agreement(s) between the Implementing Agency shall initially spend 
borrower (Government of India) or incur expenditure and subsequently 
and the Multilateral Funding claim the amount from the Funding 
Agency(ies). Agency through the office of the 

Rule 264 (3) The Department of Economic Affairs, Controller, Aid Accounts. The 
Ministry of Finance as the nodal agency remittances shall be accounted as 
shall execute the legal agreement for External Loan or Grant receipt in the 
loans or grants from external funding Consolidated Fund of India. There are 
Agency(ies). However, grant agreements two ways of dealing with the 
for Technical Assistance can also be reimbursement claims as given below: 
executed by the beneficiary Ministries or (i) Reimbursement through 
Departments with the approval of Ministry Special Account (Revolving 
of Finance, Department of Economic Fund Scheme). Under the 
Affairs. Revolving Fund Scheme, the 

Rule 264  (4) The Office of the Controller of Aid Funding Agency disburses the 
Accounts and Audit (CAAA) in the estimated expenditure of four 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry months for the projects as initial 
of Finance shall be responsible for advance to Government of India 
implementing the financial covenants laid under the respective loan or 
down in the agreement(s) executed by credit or grant agreement. Office 
Department(s) of Government of India of Controller of Aid Accounts & 
and the External Funding Agency(ies). A Audit withdraws the amount 
copy of all such agreements shall be sent specified in the agreement as 
to the Office of Controller, Aid Accounts initial deposit from the Funding 
and Audit, Department of Economic Agency, by sending a simple 
Affairs for this purpose. withdrawal application in the 

Rule 265 Currency of external aid. prescribed format after the loan is 
The external aid shall flow from the declared effective. Such initial 
Funding Agency in foreign currency or deposit designated in US Dollars 
Indian Rupees and shall be received by is received by Reserve Bank of 
the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai which India, Mumbai and Rupee 
shall remit the rupee equivalent to the equivalent shall be passed on to 
account of Controller, Aid Accounts and Controller of Aid Accounts & 
Audit, Department of Economic Affairs at Audit through Government 
Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi. The Foreign Transaction (GFT) 
remittances shall be accounted as advice. However, Reserve Bank 
external loan/Grant receipts in the of India, Mumbai shall maintain a 
Consolidated Fund of India. loan wise proforma account for 

Rule 266 Accounting of Cash grants. Cash liquidation of advance received 
grants, as distinct from commodity grant from Funding Agency. Office of 
or other assistance in kind received from Controller of Aid Accounts and 

 81 



Audit, on receipt of the payment made. Office of Controller of 
reimbursement claims from Aid Accounts and Audit shall work out the 
Project Implementing Agency, rupee equivalent of the foreign currency 
shall send an advice to Reserve payment. This rupee equivalent shall be 
Bank of India, Mumbai advising it recovered by office of Controller of Aid 
to debit the Special Account with Accounts and Audit from the Project 
the US Dollars equivalent of the Implementing Agencies or State 
amount of the eligible claim. Governments which have availed of the 
Office of Controller, Aid Accounts Direct Payment Procedure. 
and Audit shall consolidate all Note: In the case of Central Projects, 
such claims and submit to Centrally Sponsored Projects and Public 
Funding Agency for Sector or Financial Institutions, the 
replenishment of Special concerned administrative Ministry or 
Account. This shall be Department shall release the fund to the 
accompanied by a statement of Project Implementing Agency with the 
debits and credits made during instruction to deposit rupee equivalent of 
the period by Reserve Bank of the foreign currency that have been 
India, Mumbai and supporting availed of under Direct Payment 
documents received from the Procedure by them to the account of 
Project Implementing Agency. Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit at 

(ii) Reimbursement outside Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi or 
Special Account: Under the Branch of SBI so authorised. 
reimbursement procedure Rule 268 (1) Fund Flow for State Projects 
(where there is no provision in financed from external aid source. The 
the loan or credit agreement for respective Departments of the State 
the Special Account or the Government shall provide in the Budget 
balance in the Special Account is such expenditure proposed to be incurred 
‘Nil’) office of Controller of Aid under Plan Schemes during the financial 
Accounts and Audit shall send year by the Project Implementing 
the reimbursement claims Agencies. These shall be in respect of 
received from the Project State projects to be financed from 
Implementing Agency direct to external aid sources both under loan or 
the Funding Agency after credit and grants and eligible for 
checking the eligibility aspect. disbursement from Funding Agency 
The Funding Agency shall under Reimbursement or Direct Payment 
disburse the eligible expenditure Procedure. 
to the borrower’s account with Rule268 (2) Fund flow for State Projects under 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, Reimbursement Procedure. The 
who shall pass on the Rupee disbursements under the 
equivalent to the account of the “Reimbursement through Special 
Controller of Aid Accounts and Account” and “Reimbursement outside 
Audit at Reserve Bank of India, Special Account”, referred to in Rule 
New Delhi by issue of 267(i), shall be consolidated at periodical 
Government Foreign Transaction intervals under each loan or credit State-
(GFT) advice. wise by the office of the Controller of Aid 

Rule 267 (2) Direct Payment Procedure. Under Accounts and Audit. The details of the 
this procedure adopted in some cases same shall be sent to Plan Finance 
the Funding Agency, on the request of Division of the Department of 
the Project Implementing Agency Expenditure in the Ministry of Finance for 
(received through Controller of Aid release of funds to the respective State 
Accounts and Audit), duly supported by Governments. The Plan Finance division 
relevant documents, shall directly pay to of Department of Expenditure in the 
the contractor or supplier or consultant Ministry of Finance shall issue sanctions 
from the loan or credit or grant account. for actual release of the disbursement for 
The Funding Agency, after satisfying each State. A copy of such sanction shall 
itself as to the eligibility of the expenditure be endorsed to the Finance Department 
etc. remits the amount directly to the of the concerned State Government for 
account of the payees as per the information. The office of the Chief 
payment instructions. The Funding Controller of Accounts, Ministry of 
Agency apprises the office of Controller Finance shall issue the Inter-Government 
of Aid Accounts and Audit and the Project (IG) Advice to Reserve Bank of India, 
Implementing Agency of the particulars of Central Accounts Section, Nagpur, for 

 82 



effecting the release to the concerned Project Implementing Agency within six 
State Governments. The account of the weeks by the administrative Ministry or 
State Government maintained at Reserve Department with reference to expenditure 
Bank of India, Central Accounts Section, incurred by the Project Implementing 
Nagpur, shall be credited with the amount Agency. 
so released, thus, completing the cycle of Rule 270 Fund flow for Public Sector or 
funds from the expenditure incurred from Financial Institutions. When the Project 
the Budget of the State till receipt of funds Implementing Agency under Loan or 
of such expenditure from Government of Credit Agreement is a Public Sector or 
India to the State. Financial Institution or Autonomous Body 

Rule 268 (3) Fund flow for State Projects under and Government of India is the Borrower, 
Direct Payment Procedure. Under the Administrative Ministry concerned 
Direct Payment Procedure the claims shall provide in its budget funds required 
shall be processed as mentioned in Rule to be passed on to the Project 
267 (ii). Office of Controller of Aid Implementing Agency for the expenditure 
Accounts and Audit shall work out the incurred by the latter under the externally 
Rupee equivalent of such Direct Payment aided project. The Project Implementing 
based on Reserve Bank of India buying Agency shall submit claims under 
rate applicable for the value date on reimbursement or direct payment 
which the Direct Payment was made. procedures to the office of the Controller 
Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and of Aid Accounts and Audit, Department of 
Audit shall consolidate such Economic Affairs. The disbursement of 
disbursement in Rupees, and send a list the claims by the Funding Agency shall 
of such disbursement State- wise to Plan be similar as explained in Rule 267. The 
Finance Division of Department of concerned administrative Ministry or 
Expenditure at periodical intervals Department releases the amount to 
requesting them to release the amount to Project Implementing Agency based on 
the State concerned notionally and the certification of disbursement received 
recover the same for credit to Controller from the Funding Agency as certified by 
of Aid Accounts and Audit’s account. The the office of the Controller of Aid 
Plan Finance Division shall issue a Accounts and Audit. 
separate sanction for the amount to be However, where the loan is negotiated 
released to the State concerned and for directly by a particular Public Sector 
simultaneous recovery and credit back to Undertaking or Financial Institution, the 
the account of the Controller of Aid funds from the Funding Agency shall flow 
Accounts and Audit. A copy of such direct to the borrowing entity. 
sanction shall also be endorsed to the Rule 271 Repayment of loans. Office of Controller 
Finance Department of the State of Aid Accounts and Audit shall be 
Government concerned. The office of the responsible for prompt repayment of 
Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of principal on the due date as per the 
Finance shall advise Reserve Bank of agreements. The remittance of foreign 
India, Central Accounts Section, Nagpur, currency is arranged through designated 
for making necessary adjustment entries Public Sector Commercial Banks and 
in the accounts of the State concerned Reserve Bank of India. The Rupee 
under intimation to the Finance equivalent and the amount of foreign 
Department of the State and Controller of currency remitted shall be intimated by 
Aid Accounts and Audit. This completes the Banks to Controller of Aid Accounts 
the cycle of funds flow in the case of and Audit. The Rupee equivalent of the 
direct payment claims. foreign currency remitted is credited to 

Rule 269 Fund flow for Central or Central the respective Banks’ account 
sponsored Projects. Under the Central maintained at Reserve Bank of India, 
or Central sponsored project financed New Delhi, by debit to Controller of Aid 
from external aid, whether loan or grant, Accounts and Audit’s account as per 
the process of disbursement of such standing arrangement. On the receipt of 
claims by the Funding Agency shall be the advice from Reserve Bank of India, 
the same as explained in Rule 267. The New Delhi, Controller of Aid Accounts 
respective Ministry or Department get and Audit shall debit the concerned loan 
EAP funds under a separate budget head account in the Consolidated Fund of 
when Demands for Grants are passed in India. The repayment of loans shall be 
the Parliament and advised by the classified as charged expenditure. In 
Budget Division of the Ministry of cases where the funds from externally 
Finance. The funds shall be released to aided Projects are further passed on as 

 83 



loans, the recovery of the loan along with 
interest shall be the responsibility of the 
respective administrative Ministry or 
Department. 

Rule 272 Interest Payments. Interest on external 
loans shall be paid on the due date as 
stipulated in the loan or credit 
agreements against the budget provision 
made for this purpose. Interest payments 
shall be accounted for as debit under the 
Major Head ‘2049-Interest Payments’ for 
external loans in the Consolidated Fund 
of India. The procedure for transfer of 
amount shall be the same as followed in 
the case of repayment of loans, referred 
to in Rule 271 above. The interest 
payment shall be classified as charged 
expenditure. 

Rule 273 Accounting of exchange variation. The 
exchange variation in respect of foreign 
loans that have been fully repaid shall be 
adjusted written off to “8680- 
Miscellaneous Government Accounts - 
Write off in terms of Government 
Accounting Rules and the procedures 
prescribed by CGA in consultation with 
CAG. 

Rule 274 Aid in form of materials and 
equipment. In cases where materials, 
equipment and other commodities, 
without involving any cash inflow, are 
received as aid from foreign countries, 
the Funding Agency issues an advice to 
the concerned Ministry or Department 
giving details of materials supplied along 
with the value thereof. The Ministry or 
Department concerned in turn shall 
intimate the details to the office of the 
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit, 
Department of Economic Affairs for 
making the budget provision in regard to 
aid material or equipment. 
Note: Refer to Para 4.8.1 of Civil 
Accounts Manual and Note (1) below 
Major Head ‘3606-Aid Materials and 
Equipments’ of List of Major and Minor 
Heads of Account of Union and States for 
detail procedure of adjustment of value of 
the materials etc. received 

 
  

 84 



Ch.-11 - GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES 
  
Rule 275 (1) Power to Give and Limits on manner as a proposal for loan. 

Government Guarantees. The power of While examining the proposal the 
the Union Government to give following considerations shall be 
guarantees emanates from and is subject kept in view:- 
to such limits as may be fixed in terms of (a) Public interest which the 
Article 292 of the Constitution of India, the guarantee is expected to 
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget serve. 
Management Act and Rules framed there (b) Credit worthiness of the 
under as amended from time to time. borrower to ensure that no 

Rule 275 (2) In terms of the Fiscal Responsibility undue risk is involved. 
and Budget Management Act and Rules (c) Terms of the borrowing shall 
framed thereunder, the Central take into account the yields 
Government shall not give guarantees as applicable on 
aggregating the amount prescribed Government paper of similar 
therein. maturity. 

Rule 275 (3) Powers to grant Government of India (d) The conditions prescribed in 
Guarantee, including those on external the guarantee 
borrowings, vests with the Budget order/agreement in order to 
Division, Department of Economic Affairs ensure continued credit 
(DEA). worthiness of the borrower. 

Rule 276 Objectives of Government (iii) Risk associated with assumption 
Guarantees: The sovereign guarantee is of a new contingent 
normally extended for the purpose of liability/guarantee proposal, 
achieving the following objectives: including the probability of future 
(i) To improve viability of projects or payouts should be thoroughly 

activities undertaken by central assessed by the concerned 
entities with significant social and Administrative 
economic benefits; Ministry/Department or Credit 

(ii) To enable central public sector Divisions of Department of 
companies to raise resources at Economic Affairs recommending 
lower interest charges or on more the proposal. Such assessment 
favourable terms; should ideally be entrusted to an 

(iii) To fulfill the requirement in cases independent unit and should be 
where sovereign guarantee is a undertaken even when it has 
precondition for concessional already been decided by a higher 
loans from bilateral/ multilateral authority to provide guarantees. 
agencies to central public sector The assessment should reveal 
companies/agencies. an accurate picture of the 

Rule 277 Guidelines for grant of Government of financial condition of the entity to 
India Guarantee: The following be guaranteed; risks associated 
guidelines should be followed by the with implementation of the 
Ministries or Departments of the project/ scheme, etc. This 
Government of India for recommending information would be useful to 
guarantee or counter guarantee.— estimate the funds needed to 
(i) A proposal for guarantee by meet associated contingent 

Government must be justified in liabilities if the need should arise, 
public interest such as in the in current or future budgets. 
case of borrowings by central (iv) After examination in the 
public sector institutions for concerned Ministry or 
approved development purposes Department or Credit Division of 
or borrowings by central public DEA, all proposals for extending 
sector undertakings from Banks guarantees shall be referred to 
for working capital and other Budget Division, DEA for 
purposes. approval. No guarantees shall be 

(ii) The Administrative Ministry/ given without the approval of 
Department or the credit Budget Division, DEA. 
Divisions of Department of (v) With a view to enable the Ministry 
Economic Affairs shall examine of Finance to examine cases of 
the proposal in consultation with Government of India guarantees 
the Financial Adviser in the same  and extension thereto, all 

 85 



Ministries or Departments should Government etc. Even if fee, 
furnish to that Ministry, data of representation and mortgage are 
certain operational parameters of not considered necessary, the 
the Public Sector Undertaking or right to verify the continued 
Entity, as given in GFR26. In credit–worthiness of the borrower 
case the accounts of the Central should be ensured. 
Public Sector Undertaking or (xiii) Guarantees may not be 
Entity have been audited by the proposed for pursuing low priority 
Comptroller & Auditor General of objectives or programmes. 
India, the effect of the comments Proposal for grant of guarantee 
of the Comptroller & Auditor as an off-budget support should 
General of India on the Central also be examined 
Public Sector Undertaking’s comprehensively by the 
profitability should be brought proposing Ministry/Department 
out. Further, where BIFR targets against other alternative forms of 
have been assigned or Cabinet support which may be more 
directions issued to the appropriate and cost- effective. 
Company, the actuals vis-à-vis For example, in the case of 
targets for the preceding three provision of credit guarantees to 
years should be indicated. The enterprises that continually incur 
data should be furnished in the losses as a result of 
Form GFR 26 along with the government's pricing policy, 
proposal for guarantee. budgetary subsidies or direct 

(vi) Guarantees shall normally be government loans may be a more 
restricted to the repayment of effective and less costly option. 
principal and normal interest (xiv) Guarantees may not be 
component of the loan. Other proposed in respect of Central 
risks shall not form part of the Public Sector Enterprises whose 
guarantee. strong financial credentials and 

(vii) Government guarantees will be high credit rating would indicate 
extended to only central public inherent ability to directly raise 
sector companies/ agencies. the required resources without 

(viii) Government guarantees shall not the support of government 
be provided to the private sector. guarantee. 

(ix) Government guarantees should Rule 278 Borrowings from multilateral agencies 
normally not be extended for by Central Public Sector 
external commercial borrowings. Undertakings. 

(x) Government guarantees may be (i) All borrowings from the 
given on all soft loan components multilateral agencies by Central 
of the bilateral/ multilateral aid. Public Sector Undertakings 
However, guarantee shall not be would be direct (without 
normally given for the Government of India’s 
commercial loan components of intermediation) on the terms as 
such aid. agreed mutually between the 

(xi) Government of India guarantee borrower and the lender and 
will not be given in cases of approved by the Government of 
grants. However, if the donor India. However, where such 
insists on ensuring performance, terms involve guarantee of 
the same may be listed as a Government of India, prior 
negotiating condition for getting approval of the Budget Division 
the grant. of the Ministry of Finance may be 

(xii) Appropriate conditions, may be obtained. 
made by Government while (ii) The borrowing should relate to 
giving the guarantee e.g. period the Projects approved by the 
of guarantee, levy of fee to cover prescribed competent authority 
risk, representation for of the Central Government. 
Government on the Board of (iii) Wherever guarantee is to be 
Management, Mortgage or lien given by Government of India, 
on the assets, submission to the borrower shall enter into an 
Government of periodical reports agreement with the Government 
and accounts, right to get the of India for the payment of 
accounts audited on behalf of guarantee fee on the principal 

 86 



amount of the loan drawn and Government of India. 
loan outstanding from time to Rule 280 Execution of Government Guarantees. 
time. (i) Once the guarantee is approved 

(iv) The Government of India by Ministry of Finance, the 
Guarantee would only cover the guarantees will be executed and 
principal amount and the normal monitored by the Administrative 
interest. All other risks including Ministries concerned, who are 
the exchange rate risk would be also required to report the status 
shared between the borrower in this regard on an annual basis 
and lender as per terms and till they are invoked or are 
conditions prescribed in the loan obliterated. The following 
agreement. guidelines need to be kept in 

Rule 279 (1) Levy of Guarantee Fees. The rates view while issuing guarantees- 
of fee on guarantees would be as notified (a) The obligations of the 
by the Budget Division, Department of borrower to service the loan 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and the guarantee, and the 
from time to time. The rates of guarantee monitoring of the utilization 
fee are given in Appendix - 12. Ministries of the guaranteed loans, and 
or Departments shall levy the prescribed adherence to the terms and 
fee in respect of all cases. The fees are conditions of the guarantee 
also to be levied in respect of non-fund by the Borrower shall be 
based borrowings or credits (viz. letters of ensured by the 
credit, Bank guarantees etc.). In case of Administrative Ministry/ 
any doubt with regard to the Department through a back-
categorisation of any particular to- back agreement with the 
undertaking or organization or the nature borrower which may be 
of borrowing for the purpose of levy of drawn up and implemented 
fee, the matter may be referred to the to the satisfaction of the 
Budget Division for clarification. The Administrative Ministry 
Ministries or Departments should also concerned. For this 
take adequate steps to ensure prompt purpose, necessary records 
recovery of the prescribed fees. to monitor the guarantee, 

Rule 279  (2) The guarantee fee should be levied including servicing of 
before the guarantee is given and guarantee fee shall be 
thereafter on first April every year. The maintained by   the   Line 
rate of guarantee fee is to be applied on Ministries / Departments 
the amount outstanding at the beginning concerned. 
of the guarantee year. (b) Administrative Ministry 

Rule 279 (3) Where the guarantee fee is not paid should ensure that there are 
on the due date, fee should be charged at no inconsistencies between 
double the normal rates for the period of the guarantee approval 
default. given by the Ministry of 

Rule 279 (4) The Government may guarantee no Finance and the guarantee 
more than 80% of the project loan, agreement signed by it with 
depending on the conditions imposed by the borrower. The 
the lender. This would incentivize the obligations enforced by the 
lenders to make proper analysis of the Government as guarantor 
project, credit worthiness of the would be duly factored in. 
borrower(s), and build strategies for risk (c) Deviations / modifications / 
management. In such cases, bankers/ amendments on the main 
lenders may be asked to share the risk by conditions of the guarantee, 
bearing a minimum of 20% of the net loss particularly with reference to 
associated with any default. The the rate of interest on the 
arrangement would ensure that the loan to be guaranteed and 
lenders undertake a more rigorous obligations of the 
assessment of the risk exposure. Government to be covered, 
Provided further that in certain should not be referred in a 
exceptional circumstances, the routine manner to Budget 
Government of India may guarantee Division for clarification/ 
100% of the financing where the change. The Administrative 
organisation concerned is discharging Ministry concerned shall 
some function on behalf of the make out a separate case, 

 87 



fully justifying the need for IGAS, through the office of 
considering any proposed Controller/Chief Controller of 
modifications / Accounts. 
amendments, after thorough Rule 281  (1) Review of Guarantees. All Ministries 
scrutiny of the request of the or Departments shall ensure that all 
borrower for the same, guarantees are reviewed every year. The 
before placing these monitoring or review undertaken should 
proposals before the Budget examine whether the borrower is 
Division for a final decision. discharging repayment obligations or 

(d) In respect of bilateral and interest obligations as per terms of the 
multilateral credit, Standard loan agreement, whether the repaying 
format of Guarantee of the capacity for the loan and guarantee 
lending institutions may be amount is imposed in any manner, and 
examined with a view that whether all covenants and conditions are 
the same are not in being religiously followed. The Financial 
contradiction with the Advisers of the Ministries or Departments 
conditions of sovereign should undertake these reviews. A copy 
guarantee prescribed in this of the review report including on timely 
chapter, before signing by and correct payment of guarantee fees, 
the Administrative Ministry/ shall be forwarded by the Finance 
Department. The guarantee Advisor to the Budget Division by 30th 
agreement may also not April every year for the previous financial 
omit any conditions as year. 
brought out in this Chapter. Rule 281 (2) The Financial Adviser of the Ministries 
New conditions or or Departments would be responsible for 
covenants, and differences, ensuring that the annual reviews are 
if any, shall be referred to carried out by the Ministries or 
Budget Division of the Departments concerned. They shall also 
Department of Economic ensure that a register of guarantees in 
Affairs (DEA) for Form GFR 25 is maintained: - 
concurrence. (i) to keep a record of guarantees; 

(e) Guarantee proposals (ii) to retain information required 
approved by the Budget from time to time in respect of 
Division shall have to be guarantees; 
executed in the same (iii) to keep record of the annual 
financial year. If the reviews to see that these are 
guarantee/ loan agreement carried out regularly; 
is not signed in the same (iv) to keep record of levy and 
financial year as that of the recovery of guarantee fee; 
approval of the guarantee (v) to send data as contained in 
proposal, the guarantee Form GFR 25, duly updated 
proposal shall have to be every year to the Budget Division 
submitted again. in the Ministry of Finance, 

(f) The guarantee shall hold Department of Economic Affairs 
only for the specific purpose by tenth of April. 
agreed to by the Budget Rule 281 (3) In respect of guarantees issued by the 
Division. Ministry of Finance for external loans, the 

(g) Guarantee given by respective credit divisions of Department 
Government of India shall of Economic Affairs shall conduct an 
be non - transferrable and annual review in consultation with the 
would cease to exist in case Financial Adviser (DEA). For this 
the ownership of the entity is purpose, the Financial Adviser (DEA) 
transferred from shall ensure the maintenance of the 
Government of India, unless required registers, as well as ensure that 
the Guarantee is re- the annual reviews are carried out by the 
confirmed by the Budget concerned credit divisions, and report 
Division. forwarded to the Budget Division in Form 

(ii) The Financial Advisers in GFR 25. In cases, where the guarantees 
Ministry/ Department will perform on external loans are issued by the 
the responsibility of maintenance concerned administrative Ministry, that 
of records and reporting including Ministry would be responsible for 
for the Finance Accounts and the conducting the review. 

 88 



Rule 281 (4) Classification of guarantees. For the Controller General of Accounts, 
purpose of record keeping, guarantees for onward submission to Budget 
shall be classified as under:- Division. Based upon the inputs, 
(i) guarantees given to the RBI, a statement of Guarantees given 

other banks and industrial and by the Central Government is 
financial institutions for depicted as an annexure in the 
repayment of principal and Receipt Budget. 
payment of interest, cash credit (ii) While furnishing the Statement of 
facility, financing seasonal guarantees to the Ministry of 
agricultural operations and/or Finance, the Administrative 
providing working capital to Ministries or Departments should 
companies, corporations, ensure and certify that the 
cooperative societies and banks; amounts shown tally with the 

(ii) guarantees given for repayment total figures in the statement to 
of share capital, payment of be included in the Detailed 
minimum annual dividend and Demands for grants. 
repayment of bonds or loans, (iii) While furnishing the summary 
debentures issued or raised by statements, the Ministries or 
the statutory corporations and Departments should also certify 
central public sector that the information tallies with 
undertakings; the material furnished to the 

(iii) guarantees given in pursuance of Controller General of Accounts 
agreements   entered into by the for the purpose of inclusion in the 
Government of India with Finance Accounts of the relevant 
international financial institutions, year and is compliant with Indian 
foreign lending agencies, foreign Government Accounting 
governments, contractors, Standard-1 (IGAS-1) relating to 
suppliers, consultants etc., Government Guarantees. 
towards repayment of principal, Rule283 (1) Invocation of Guarantee. A 
interest and/ or commitment Guarantee Redemption Fund (GRF) has 
charges on loans etc., and /or for been established in the Public Account of 
payment against supplies of India for redemption of guarantees given 
material and equipment; to CPSEs, Financial Institutions, etc., by 

(iv) counter guarantees to banks in the Central Government whenever such 
consideration of the banks guarantees are invoked. The funding to 
having issued letters of credit or the Guarantee Redemption Fund is to be 
authority to foreign suppliers for done through budgetary appropriations, 
supplies made or services as considered appropriate, under the 
rendered. head 'Transfer to Guarantee Redemption 

(v) guarantees given to Railways for Fund' through the Demands for Grants of 
due and punctual payment of the Department of Economic Affairs. 
dues by Central Government Rule283 (2) The Administrative Ministries/ 
companies or corporation; Departments should inform any case of 

(vi) Others guarantees not covered impending/likely invocation, well in 
under above five classes. advance, to the Budget Division, along 

Rule 282 Accounting for Guarantees. In order to with the proposed corrective measures. 
ensure greater transparency in its fiscal Rule283 (3) In the event of invocation of a 
operations in the public interest, Rule 6 of guarantee, the obligation may be 
the FRBM Rules, 2004 requires discharged by sanctioning loan to the 
government to publish a disclosure borrowing entity equal to the amount of 
statement on guarantees given by guarantee outstanding with the approval 
government, at the time of presenting the of Budget Division, Ministry of Finance. 
annual financial statement and demands However, any payment on this account 
for grants. This statement covers, inter will finally be charged to the Guarantee 
alia, details regarding the class and Redemption Fund maintained in the 
number of guarantees, amounts Public Accounts. 
guaranteed, outstanding, invocations,   
guarantee fee payable and other material 
details. 
(i) The statement is to be compiled 

by the Administrative Ministries / 
Departments and submitted to 

 89 



Ch.-12 - MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS 
 period and no formal 
I. ESTABLISHMENT appointment or officiating 
 arrangement is made in his 
Rule 284 (1) Proposal for additions to place. 

Establishment. (iii) Where due to administrative 
All proposals for additions to exigencies a government servant 
establishment shall be submitted to is required to move to another 
sanctioning authority in accordance with post relinquishing his post 
the instructions issued by Department of against local arrangement. 
Expenditure in this regard time to time.58 Rule 286 (2) In cases in which the transfer of 

Rule 284 (2) All proposals for creation of new posts charge involves assumption of 
or a revision in an existing establishment responsibility for cash, stores, etc., the 
should contain, inter alia:- following instructions should be 
(i) the present cost of the observed: - 

establishment in existence; (i) The Cash Book or imprest 
(ii) cost implications of the change account should be closed on the 

proposed giving details of pay date of transfer and a note 
and allowances of post(s) recorded in it over the signatures 
proposed; of both the relieved and the 

(iii) expenditure in respect of claim to relieving Government servants, 
pension or gratuity or other showing the cash and imprest 
retirement benefits that may arise balances and the number of 
in consequence of the proposals; unused cheques/receipt books, if 

(iv) details on how the expenditure is any, made over and received by 
proposed to be met including them respectively. 
proposed re-appropriations. (ii) The relieving Government 

Rule 284 (3) Continuation of an existing post servant should bring to notice 
beyond the specified duration will be with anything irregular or 
explicit approval of Ministry of Finance, objectionable in the conduct of 
based on functional justification. business that may have come 

Rule 284 (4) All proposals for increase in officially to his notice to the 
emoluments for an existing post(s) shall incoming officer. 
be referred to the Ministry of Finance for (iii) In the case of any sudden 
approval. casualty occurring or any 

Rule 285 All service matters from entry to exit, emergent necessity arising for a 
including leave, transfer, promotion, Government servant to relinquish 
performance appraisal should be his charge, the next senior officer 
maintained in a digitised format. of the department present shall 

Rule 286 (1) Transfer of Charge. A report of take charge. When the person 
transfer of a Gazetted Government who takes charge is not a 
servant duly made in Form GFR 16 and Gazetted Government servant, 
signed both by the relieved and relieving he must at once report the 
Government servants, shall be sent on circumstances to his nearest 
the same day to the Head of the departmental superior and obtain 
Department or other Controlling Officers orders as to the cash in hand, if 
concerned except in the following types any. 
of cases in respect of which report of Rule 286 (3) The additional procedure to be 
transfer of charge need not be signed followed by an Audit Officer or Accounts 
both by the relieving and relieved Officer, etc., in making over charge of his 
Government servants simultaneously functions in connection with the 
and may be sent independently:- Charitable Endowments and other Trust 
(i) Where a Gazetted Government Accounts is laid down in Appendix – 8. 

servant assumes charge of a Rule 287 Date of Birth. Every person newly 
newly created or vacant post or appointed to a service or a post under 
relinquishes charge of a post Government shall, at the time of the 
which has been abolished. appointment, declare the date of birth by 

(ii) Where a Gazetted government the Christian era with confirmatory 
servant vacates a post for a short documentary evidence such as a 

 
58 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of  
Finance (MoF) OM No. 14(37)/2015-E.II.A dated 12.07.2024. 

 90 



Matriculation Certificate, where forfeited. 
prescribed qualification for appointment Rule 291 Reckoning the date in case of T.A. claims 
is Matriculation or above. In other cases by retired Government servants 
Municipal Birth Certificate or Certificate appearing in a Court of Law for defending 
from the recognised school last attended himself. - Retired Government servants 
shall be treated as a valid document. become eligible for reimbursement of 

Rule 288 (1) Service Book. Detailed Rules for Travelling expenses in respect of 
maintenance of Service Books are travel(s) for appearing in court of law for 
contained in SRs. Service Books defending himself only when the 
maintained in the establishment should judgement relating to his honorable 
be verified every year by the Head of acquittal is pronounced by the court. In 
Office who, after satisfying himself that such cases the date of pronouncements 
the services of Government servants of the judgement shall be the reference 
concerned are correctly recorded in each point for submission and reimbursement 
Service Book shall record the following of his T.A claim. 
certificate “Service verified from ……(the Rule 292 Due date of Leave Travel Concession 
date record from which the verification is claim. Leave Travel Concession claim of 
made) ........................................upto a government servant shall fall due for 
…….................(date)…………” payment on the date succeeding the date 

Rule 288 (2) The service book of a government of completion of return journey. The time 
servant shall be maintained in duplicate. limit for submission of the claims shall be 
First copy shall be retained and as under :- 
maintained by the Head of the Office and (i) In case advance drawn: Within 
the second copy should be given to the thirty days of the due date. 
government servant for safe custody as (ii) In case advance not drawn: 
indicated below:- Within sixty days of the due date. 
(i) To the existing employees - In case of (i) above if the claim is not 

within six months of the date on submitted within one month of the due 
which these rules become date, the amount of advance shall be 
effective, if not already given. recovered but the Government employee 

(ii) To new appointees - within one shall be allowed to submit the claim as 
month of the date of under (ii) above. In case of failure to 
appointment. submit the claim in both the cases within 

Rule 288 (3) In January each year the Government the prescribed time lines, the claim shall 
servant shall handover his copy of the stand forfeited. 
Service Book to his office for updation. Rule 293 Due date of Over Time Allowance 
The office shall update and return it to the claims. A claim for overtime allowance 
Government Servant within thirty days of shall fall due for payment on first day of 
its receipt. the month following the month to which 

Rule 288 (4) In case the Government servants’ the overtime allowance relates. The claim 
copy is lost by the government servant, it shall stand forfeited if not submitted 
shall be replaced on payment of a sum of within 60 days of the due date. 
Rs. 500/-. Rule 294 Due date of a withheld increment. In 

Rule 288 (5) All Service Books should be digitised the absence of any specific order 
for easy reference and to avoid problems withholding an ordinary increment under 
in case of loss of Service Books. FR 24 before the date on which it falls due 

Rule 289 Retrospective claim due from date of for payment, the period of one year 
sanction. In the case of sanction should be counted from the date on which 
accorded with retrospective effect the it falls due and not with reference to the 
charge does not become due before it is date on which the Increment Certificate is 
sanctioned. In such cases the time-limit signed by the competent authority. Even 
specified in Rule296 (1) should be where an increment is withheld, the time-
reckoned from the date of sanction and limit should be reckoned from the date on 
not from the date on which the sanction which it falls due after taking into account 
takes effect. the period for which it is withheld. 

Rule 290 Due date of T. A. claim. Travelling Rule 295 (1) Arrear Claims. Any arrear claim of a 
allowance claim of a government servant Government servant which is preferred 
shall fall due for payment on the date within two years of its becoming due shall 
succeeding the date of completion of the be settled by the Drawing and Disbursing 
journey. He shall submit the travelling Officer or Accounts Officer, as the case 
allowance claim within sixty days of its may be, after usual checks. 
becoming due failing which it shall stand  

 91 



Rule 295 (2) For the purpose of the above withdrawal from Provident Fund shall, 
provisions, the date on which the claim is unless it is specifically renewed, lapse on 
presented at the office of disbursement the expiry of a period of three month. This 
should be considered to be the date on will, however, not apply to withdrawals 
which it is preferred. effected in installments. In such cases the 

Rule 295 (3) sanction accorded for non-refundable 
(i) A claim of a government servant withdrawals from Provident Fund will 

which has been allowed to remain valid up to a particular date to be 
remain in abeyance for a period specified by the sanctioning authority in 
exceeding two years, should be the sanction order itself. 
investigated by the Head of the  
Department concerned. If the II. REFUND OF REVENUE 
Head of Department is satisfied  
about the genuineness of the Rule 300 Sanctions of refunds of revenue. All 
claim on the basis of the sanctions to refunds of revenue shall be 
supporting documents and there regulated by the orders of an 
are valid reasons for the delay in Administrator or of the departmental 
preferring the claims, the claims authority, as the case may be, according 
should be paid by the Drawing to the provisions of the rules and orders 
and Disbursing Officer or contained in the departmental manuals 
Accounts Officer, as the case etc. 
may be, after usual checks. Rule 301 (1) Communication of refund 

(ii) A Head of Department may sanctions to audit. The sanction to a 
delegate the powers, conferred refund of revenue may either be given on 
on him by sub rule (i) above to the the bill itself or quoted therein and a 
subordinate authority competent certified copy of the same attached to the 
to appoint the Government bill in the latter case. 
servant by whom the claim is Rule 301 (2) Suitable note of refund to be made 
made. in original Cash Book entry and other 

Rule 296 (1) Procedure for dealing with time- documents. Before a refund of revenue 
barred claims. is made, the original demand or 
Even a time barred claim of a realization, as the case may be, must be 
Government servant, shall be entertained linked and a reference to the refund 
by the concerned authority provided that should be recorded against the original 
the concerned authority is satisfied that entry in the Cash Book or other 
the claimant was prevented from documents so as to make the 
submitting his claim within the prescribed entertainment of a double or erroneous 
time limit on account of causes and claim impossible. 
circumstance beyond his control. Rule 301  (3) Remission of revenue before 

Rule 296 (2) A time barred claim referred to in collection is not refund. Remissions of 
Rule296 (1) shall be paid with the revenue allowed before collection are to 
express sanction of the Government be treated as reduction of demands and 
issued with the previous consent of the not as refunds. 
Internal Finance Wing of the Ministry or Rule 301  (4) Refunds not regarded as 
Department concerned. expenditure for allotment. Refunds of 

Rule 297 Time barred claims of persons not in revenues are not regarded as 
Government service. The provisions of expenditure for purposes of grants or 
Rule 289 to Rule 296 shall apply mutatis appropriation. 
mutandis to arrear claims preferred Rule 301 (5) Competent authority in case of 
against Government by persons not in credits wrongly classified. In cases 
Government service. where revenue is credited to a wrong 

Rule 298  Retrospective sanctions.  head of account or credited wrongly 
Retrospective effect shall not be given by under some misapprehension, the 
competent authorities to sanctions authority competent to order refund of 
relating to revision of pay or grant of revenue shall, in such cases, be the 
concessions to Government servants, authority to whom the original receipts 
except in very special circumstances with correctly pertain. 
the previous consent of the Ministry of Rule 302 Compensation for accidental loss of 
Finance. property. No compensation for 

Rule 299 Currency of sanction of Provident accidental loss of property shall be paid 
Fund advance/withdrawal. A sanction to an officer except with the approval of 
to an advance or a non-refundable part the Ministry of Finance. Compensation 

 92 



will not ordinarily be granted to an officer before the submission of the bill 
for any loss to his property which is for payment. 
caused by floods, cyclone, earthquake or (vi) Similar provisions shall also be 
any other natural calamity or which is due made towards subscribers to 
to an ordinary accident, which may occur New Pension System (NPS). 
to any citizen, for example, loss by theft Rule 304 (2) Crediting of Interest. The deposit 
or as a result of a railway accident or fire accounts of these funds on the 
etc. The mere fact that at the time of the Government book will be credited with 
accident, the Government servant is interest at such rates and at such 
technically on duty or is living in intervals as may be prescribed by 
Government quarters in which he is Ministry of Finance in each case. 
forced to reside for the performance of his Rule 305 (1) Maintenance of a register for 
duties will not be considered as a recovery of Postal Life Insurance 
sufficient ground for the grant of Premia. All drawing officers should 
compensation. maintain in Form (GFR 20) record of 

 Postal Life Insurance policy (PLI) holders. 
III. DEBT AND MISCELLANEOUS Rule 305 (2) The register should be kept upto date, 

OBLIGATIONS OF GOVERNMENT the names of the policy holders should be 
 noted in alphabetical order according to 
Rule 303 Public Debt. The public debt raised by surnames, leaving sufficient space 

government by issue of securities shall between two entries to enable 
be managed by the Reserve Bank. The newcomers names being inserted in the 
Reserve Bank shall also manage right place. 
securities created and issued under any (i) A separate entry should be made in the 
other law or rule having the force of law, register for each policy in the case of a policy 
provided such law or rule provides holder having more than one policy. 
specifically for their management by the (ii) On receipt of an intimation from the Director, 
Reserve Bank. Postal Life Insurance, Kolkata, about the issue 

Rule 304 (1) Provident Funds. The procedure of a policy in favour of a subscriber authorizing 
relating to the recovery of, subscriptions the Drawing Officer to commence recovery 
to and withdrawals from, the Provident from pay, or on receipt of a Last Pay 
Funds established under accordance Certificate in respect of the subscriber 
with the provisions of the respective transferred from another office, the Drawing 
Provident Fund Rules. Following Officer should make a note of the particulars 
instructions should be carefully observed of the policy in the register. The name of the 
by the Head of the Offices for correct office from which the subscriber has been 
preparation of the Provident Fund transferred should invariably be noted in the 
schedules:- remarks column. Wherever a subscriber is 
(i) A complete list of subscribers to transferred to another office or his policy is 

each fund should be maintained discharged, his name should be scored out 
in each disbursing office in the from the register giving necessary remarks. 
form of the schedule. (iii) After the preparation of the monthly pay bill, 

(ii) Each new subscriber should be the amount of recovery on account of PLI 
brought on this list and any premium shown in the bill should be posted in 
subsequent changes resulting the monthly column in the register with proper 
from his transfer or in the rate of reference to the bills or the vouchers. The fact 
subscription etc. clearly indicated of excess or non-recovery should be briefly 
in the schedule. noted in the remarks column. Extracts should 

(iii) When a subscriber dies, quits be attached to the relevant bills in support of 
service or is transferred to the recoveries. While taking extracts it should 
another office, full particulars be seen that the names of those insurants 
should be duly recorded in the from whom recoveries were made in previous 
list. months but no recoveries have been made 

(iv) In the case of transfer of a during the current month either on account of 
subscriber to another office, the transfer or discharge of that policy or on 
necessary note of transfer should account of leave salary being not drawn or the 
be made in the list of both the official being on leave without pay, should be 
offices. included in the current month's schedule and 

(v) From this list the monthly necessary remarks noted against their names. 
schedule to be appended to the (iv) Similarly, the remarks 'New Policy' or 
pay bill should be prepared and Transferred from 
tallied with recoveries made ……………………………Office should 

 93 



begiven in the schedule against the names of (ii) such exemption is granted only in 
insurant entered for the first time in current the case of a permanent 
month. Reasons for short or excess recovery Government servant; and 
should be noted briefly in the remarks column. (iii) the period of officiating 
In short, schedule of Postal Life Insurance arrangement does not exceed 
recoveries to be attached to the bills, would be four months. 
a record not only of those from whom the Rule 307 Notwithstanding anything contained in 
recovery has actually been affected but also Rule 306, security need not be furnished 
of those from whom recovery was being in cases of – 
affected previously but has not been affected. (a) Government servants who are 

 entrusted with the custody of 
IV. SECURITY DEPOSITS stores, which in the opinion of the 
 competent authority are not 
Rule 306 (1) Furnishing of security by considerable. 

Government servants handling cash. (b) Government servants, who are 
Subject to any general or special entrusted with the custody of 
instructions prescribed by Government in office furniture, stationery and 
this behalf, every Government servant, other articles required for office 
who actually handles cash or stores shall management, if the Head of 
be required to furnish security, for such Office is satisfied about the 
amount and in such form as Central safeguards against loss through 
Government or an Administrator may pilferage. 
prescribe according to circumstances (c) Librarian and Library Staff. 
and local conditions in each case, and to (d) Drivers of Government vehicles. 
execute a security bond setting forth the Rule 308 Retention of Security. A security 
conditions under which Government will deposit taken from Government servant 
hold the security and may ultimately shall be retained for at least six months 
refund or appropriate it. from the date he vacates his post, but a 

Rule 306 (2) The amount of security to be obtained security bond shall be retained 
from a Government servant shall be permanently or until it is certain there is 
determined on the basis of actual cash no further necessity for keeping it. 
handled which shall not include account  
payee cheques and drafts. V. TRANSFER OF LAND AND BUILDINGS  

Rule 306 (3) Security should be furnished in the  
form of a Fidelity Bond in GFR 17, the Rule 309 Save as otherwise provided in any law, 
security bond should be executed in rule or order relating to the transfer of 
Form GFR 14. The Administration shall Government land, no land belonging to 
see that the government servant pays the the Government or any of its bodies, 
premia necessary to keep the Bond alive, including autonomous bodies, PSUs, etc. 
for which the government servant shall shall be sold without previous sanction of 
submit premium receipt in time. If the the Government. 
government servant fails to submit the Rule 310 (1)Transfer of Land. Transfer of land 
premium receipt he shall not be allowed from a Union Territory to a Central 
to perform the duties of his post and he Government Department (i.e. Ministry or 
shall be dealt with in accordance with the Department of the Union Government 
terms of his appointment. including Defence, Railways, and Posts 

Rule 306 (4) A Government servant who is and Telegraphs) or vice versa shall be on 
officiating against the post of another 'no profit no loss' basis. 
cash or store handling Government Rule 310 (2) Transfer of land from one Department 
servant shall be required to furnish the full of the Government (as defined in Rule 
amount of the security prescribed for the 309) to another shall be on 'no profit no 
post. The Ministry or Department of loss' basis. 
Central Government, Administrators and ‘No profit no loss’ as indicated at rules 
the Comptroller and Auditor General in 310(1) and 310(2) above does not 
respect of persons serving in Indian Audit necessarily mean transfer being effected 
and Accounts Department may, however, with ‘zero cost’. Transfer can be on the 
exempt a Government servant officiating basis of mutually agreeable terms and 
in such a short-term vacancy from conditions or in exchange for equal value 
furnishing security if the circumstances land or payment of value of land or cost 
warrant such exemption provided that - of acquisition. 
(i) they are satisfied that there is no Rule 310 (3) Transfer of buildings and 

risk involved; superstructures on land shall be treated 

 94 



similar to transfer of land. Transfer of collected by Government for or on behalf 
buildings and superstructures on land of local bodies shall not be appropriated 
vide above shall be at the present day direct to a local fund without passing 
cost minus depreciation of these them through the Consolidated Fund 
structure(s) standing on the land. unless expressly authorised by law. 
Valuation for this purpose shall be Rule 315 Payments to Local Bodies. Subject to 
obtained from the Central Public Works provision of relevant act and rules, 
Department at the time of transfer. payments to local bodies in respect of 

Rule 310 (4) The allotment of land to, and recovery revenue and other moneys raised or 
of cost of buildings from the Public Sector received by Government on their behalf 
Undertakings shall be at 'market value' as will be made in such manner and on such 
defined in paragraph - 2 of Appendix - 7. date, as may be authorized by general or 

Rule 310 (5) The transfer of land and building special orders of Government. 
between the Union and State Rule 316 Audit of Account of Local Bodies. 
Governments shall be regulated by the Subject to the provisions of any law made 
provisions of Articles 294, 295, 298 under Article 149 of the Constitution, the 
and299 of the Constitution and subsidiary accounts of local bodies, other non- 
instructions issued by the Union Government bodies, or institutions will be 
Government which are reproduced as audited by the Indian Audit and Accounts 
Appendix - 7. Department under such terms and 

 conditions as may be agreed upon 
VI. CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS AND between the Government and the 

OTHER TRUSTS Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 Rule 317 Audit Fees. Audit fees on the basis of 
Rule 311 Detailed instructions relating to daily rates prescribed by Government in 

Charitable Endowments and other Trusts consultation with the Comptroller and 
are embodied in Appendix -8. Auditor General of India from time to time 

 shall be charged by the Indian Audit and 
VII. LOCAL BODIES Accounts Department for the audit of 
 local and other non-Government funds, 
Rule 312 (1)Financial arrangements between excluding funds for the audit of which the 

Central Government and Local rates of fees recoverable are prescribed 
Bodies. Unless any one of the following by law or by rules having the force of law. 
arrangements is authorized by specific Provided that nothing contained in this 
orders of Government, a local body will rule shall be held to override any special 
be required to pay, in advance, the instructions of Government exempting 
estimated amount of charges to be any particular local body or institution 
incurred or cost of services to be wholly or partially from the payment of 
rendered, by Government on account of audit fees. 
the fund:- Rule 318 In the case of Government Companies, 
(i) payments made by Government the recovery of the cost of Supplementary 

are debited to the balances of the Audit conducted under Section 143(6) of 
deposits of the local fund with Companies Act, 2013 as amended from 
government; or time to time, should be waived in those 

(ii) payments are made as advances cases where the audit is done by the 
from public funds in the first Comptroller and Auditor General through 
instance pending recovery from his own departmental staff but should be 
the local funds. enforced in cases where the Comptroller 

Rule 312 (2) Notwithstanding the provision and Auditor General employs 
contained in Rule 312 (1) in case of professional auditors for the 
emergency such as epidemics pre- Supplementary Audit. 
payment will not be insisted upon from Rule 319 Financial transactions between 
local bodies for supply of medicines from Government and local bodies shall be 
Medical Stores Depots of the Ministry of rounded off to the nearest Rupee. 
Health.  

Rule313 Any amount or loan not paid on due date VIII. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
to Government by a local body, may be  
adjusted from any non-statutory grant Rule320 (1) Destruction of Records. Subject to 
sanctioned for payment to it. any general or special rules or orders 

Rule 314 Taxes etc. collected by Government applicable to particular departments as 
on behalf of Local Bodies. Proceeds of prescribed in their departmental manuals, 
taxes, fines or other revenues levied or no Government record connected with 

 95 



accounts shall be destroyed except in if any, shall be submitted by the 
accordance with the provisions of government servant within fifteen days of 
Appendix -9. the drawal of advance, failing which the 

Rule 320 (2) All the records prescribed for retention advance or balance shall be recovered 
in Appendix - 9, if maintained in electronic from his next salary(ies). 
form should mandatorily have a back up Rule 324 The Ministry or Department may sanction 
and adhere strictly to the retention period the grant of an advance to a Government 
and the prescribed formats. The Pleader in connection with law suits, to 
responsibility for verification and which Government is a party, up to the 
certification on a monthly/annual basis as maximum limit of Rupees twenty-five 
prescribed under relevant rules should thousand at a time. The amount so 
also be ensured. advanced should be adjusted at the time 

 of settlement of Counsel’s fee bills.
IX. EXPENDITURE FOR CONTINGENT 

AND MISCELLANEOUS PURPOSE59 
 
Rule 321 Rules relating to incurring contingent 

expenditure are available under Section 
III of Subsidiary Instructions to Central 
Government Account (Receipt & 
Payment) Rules 2022.60 

Rule 322 Permanent Advance or Imprest. 
Permanent advance or Imprest for 
meeting day to day contingent and 
emergent expenditure may be granted to 
a government servant by the Head of the 
Department in consultation with Internal 
Finance Wing, keeping the amount of 
advance to the minimum required for 
smooth functioning. Procedures for 
maintenance of permanent advance or 
Imprest are available in para 10.12 of the 
Civil Accounts Manual. 

Rule 323 (1) Advances for Contingent and 
Miscellaneous purpose. The Head of 
the  Office may sanction advances to a 
Government Servant for purchase of 
goods or services or any other special 
purpose needed for the management of 
the office, subject to the following 
conditions:- 
(i) The amount of expenditure being 

higher than the Permanent 
Advance available, cannot be 
met out of it. 

(ii) The purchase or other purpose 
cannot be managed under the 
normal procedures, envisaging 
post- procurement payment 
system. 

(iii) The amount of advance should 
not be more than the power 
delegated to the Head of the 
Office for the purpose. 

(iv) The Head of the Office shall be 
responsible for timely recovery or 
adjustment of the advance. 

Rule 323 (2)The adjustment bill, along with balance 

 
59 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of 60 Amended vide Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) OM No. 14(37)/2015-E.II.A dated 12.07.2024. Finance (MoF) OM No. 14(37)/2015-E.II.A dated 12.07.2024. 
  

 96 



 

APPENDIX– 1 
  [See Rule 37 ] 

 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGULATING THE ENFORCEMENT  
OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR LOSSES, ETC. 

 

 
1. The cardinal principle governing the assessment of responsibility is that, every Government officer should 

exercise the same vigilance in respect of expenditure from public fund generally as a person of ordinary 
prudence would exercise in respect of the expenditure and the custody of his own money. While, the competent 
authority may, in special cases, condone an officer's honest errors of judgement involving financial loss if the 
officer can show that he has acted in good faith and done his best up to the limits of his ability and experience, 
personal liability shall be strictly enforced against all officers who are dishonest, careless or negligent in the 
duties entrusted to them. 

2. In cases where loss is due to delinquencies of subordinate officials and where it appears that this has been 
facilitated by laxity of supervision on the part of a superior officer, the latter shall also be called strictly to 
account and his personal liability in the matter carefully assessed. 

3. (a)The question of enforcing pecuniary liability shall always be considered as well as the question of other 
forms of disciplinary action. In deciding the degree of an officer's pecuniary liability, it will be necessary to look 
not only to the circumstances of the case but also to the financial circumstances of the officer, since it should 
be recognized that the penalty should not be such as to impair his future efficiency. 
(b)In particular if the loss has occurred through fraud, every endeavour should be made to recover the whole 
amount lost from the guilty persons and if laxity of supervision has facilitated the fraud, the supervising officer 
at fault may properly be penalized either directly by requiring him to make good in money a sufficient proportion 
of the loss or indirectly by reduction or stoppage of his increments of pay. 
(c)It should always be considered whether the depreciated value of the Government property or equipment 
lost, damaged or destroyed by the carelessness of individuals entrusted with their care should be recovered 
from the delinquent official. The depreciated value of the stores may be calculated by applying the 20% of 
depreciation in the case of vehicles, including cycles, and 15% in the case of calculating machines, on the 
reduced balance every year. The amount to be recovered may be limited to the Government servant's capacity 
to pay. 

4. When a pensionable Government servant is concerned in any irregularity or loss, the authority investigating 
the case shall bear in mind the provisions contained in Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules 1972 as 
amended from time to time and immediately inform the Audit Officer and/or the Accounts Officer, as the case 
may be, responsible for reporting on his title to Pension or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity, and the authority 
competent to sanction Pension or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity and it will be the duty of the latter to make 
a note of the information and see that the Gratuity or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity is not paid before a 
conclusion is arrived at as regards the Government servant's culpability and final orders are issued thereon. 

5. The fact that Government servants who were guilty of frauds or irregularities have been demobilized or have 
retired and have thus escaped punishment, should not be made a justification for absolving those who are also 
guilty but who still remain in service. 

6. It is of the greatest importance to avoid delay in the investigation of any loss due to fraud, negligence, financial 
irregularity, etc. Should the administrative authority require the assistance of the Audit Officer and/or the 
Accounts Officer, as the case may be, in pursuing the investigation, he may call on that officer for all vouchers 
and other documents that may be relevant to the investigation; and if the investigation is complex and he needs 
the assistance of an expert Audit Officer/ Accounts Officer to unravel it, he should apply forthwith for that 
assistance to Government which will then negotiate with Audit Officer and/or the Accounts Officer concerned 
for the services of an investigating staff. Thereafter, the administrative authority and the Audit /Accounts 
authority shall be personally responsible within their respective spheres, for the expeditious conduct of the 
enquiry. In any case in which it appears that recourse to judicial proceedings is likely, the Special Police 
Establishment or the State Police should be associated with the investigation. 

7. Depending upon the results of the inquiry, departmental proceedings and/or prosecution shall be instituted at 
the earliest moment against the delinquent officials concerned and conducted with strict adherence to the 
Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957, and other instructions prescribed in 
this regard by Government. 

 
 
 

 
 

 92 



 

APPENDIX– 2 
[See Rule 52 ] 

 
PROCEDURE FOR PREPARATION OF  
DETAILED ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS 

 
 
 
1. Revenue receipts. - These comprise (i) Central taxes, duties and cesses administered by the Central Board 

of Direct Taxes and the Central Board of Excise and Customs; (ii) local taxes and duties and other receipts in 
relation to the Union Territories without Legislature; (iii) interest receipts of loans and advances by the Central 
Government as also interest charged to commercial departments, etc., (iv) notional receipts from adjustments 
based on principles of accounting like grant assistance from foreign Governments or International institutions; 
and (v) all other revenue receipts including dividends on equity investments of the Central Government, cesses 
collected by the Ministries and Departments, etc. 

2. Capital Receipts. These comprise (i) Internal debt (market loan, treasury bills, etc.); (ii) External debt; (iii) 
Repayment of loans and advances made by the Central Government; (iv) Disinvestment Receipts (v) Other 
Liabilities. 

3. (1)Estimates of receipts of Central Taxes and Duties and External Aid receipts are prepared within the Ministry 
of Finance by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, the Central Board of Excise and Customs and the Controller 
of Aid Accounts and Audit. Estimates of internal debt (market loans) receipts are framed by the Budget Division. 
(2)Estimates of revenue receipts of the Union Territory Administrations will be furnished to the Ministry of 
Finance by the concerned Audit Officer / Accounts Officer wherever departmentalization of accounts has not 
taken place and by the Controller of Accounts of the Union Territory Administrations where departmentalization 
of accounts has been introduced. 
(3)Estimates of receipts in all other cases will be prepared by Controller of Accounts of each Department after 
obtaining necessary data by the 30th November from the various organizations / field units and such scrutiny 
as may be necessary in the light of policy decisions and other post Budget developments. 

4. Estimates will be furnished to the Ministry of Finance in prescribed forms (GFR 2, 2-A and 2-B) by the 
prescribed date, each year for the ensuing Budget. 

5. (1)In preparing the Revised Estimates, while previous year's actuals and current year's trends will be material 
factors to review the original Budget Estimates, special attention should be devoted to making as realistic an 
estimate as possible of receipts which are likely to materialize during the rest of the financial year. 

 (2)In framing the Budget Estimates for the ensuing year, the estimating authorities should exercise utmost 
care. While all receipts which can be foreseen in the light of latest trends, decisions and developments must 
be provided for, care should be taken to ensure that undue optimism does not influence these estimates. 
Similarly, where the receipts have a seasonal character, due note should be taken thereof in preparing the 
estimates. 

 (3) Receipts by way of recoveries from Central Government Ministries / Departments, are to be excluded in 
preparing Receipt Estimates. Other recoveries (from the State and Union Territory Governments, foreign 
Governments, companies and statutory bodies, individuals, etc.) will, however, be included in the Receipt 
Estimates. 

 (4) Estimates of receipts by way of interest on loans and advances will be based on the terms of the loans 
sanctioned, as entered in the Loan Registers, including defaults, if any. The estimates should be realistic; that 
is to say, that the estimates should reflect not merely what is due but what is likely to be realized during the 
year together with the reasons for non-recovery of the difference between receipts due and assumed in the 
estimates. In the case of Public Sector Units, interest receipts expected from their internal resources should 
be distinguished from notional recoveries offset by corresponding expenditure provisions in the form of 
subsidies and loans. 
Similarly, where repayments due are refinanced by further loans or by conversion of past loans into equity, the 
details should be furnished. 
(5) In reporting estimates of receipts by way of foreign grant assistance in cash or in kind, care should be taken 
to classify foreign grant receipts in cash under the Major Head '1605 External Grant Assistance' and those in 
the form of commodities under the Major Head '1606 Aid Materials and Equipment'. In the case of commodities 
grants, identical provision will be made in expenditure estimates under the Major head '3606 Aid Materials and 
Equipment's' (both as debits to represent the notional payment therefor and as credits - recoveries in reductions 
of expenditure - to reflect the counter-balancing entries), as well as under the final functional Head of Account 
showing the final destination and use of the aid materials and equipment.(Refer to Form GFR 2A). 
 
NOTE. For utilization of cash grants, provision in expenditure estimates under the final functional Heads of 
Account will be necessary. 
 

 93 



 

 (6)In reporting the estimates, the estimating authorities should confine their estimates to those items of receipts 
which are to be accounted for finally in their own accounts and ultimately in the accounts of the Ministry/ 
Department to which they are subordinate. All other receipts/recoveries entering the accounts of another 
Ministry/ Department should be communicated to the concerned Ministry/Department for consolidation in their 
estimates (e.g., receipts of CGHS contributions and rent recoveries in respect of Government accommodation). 

 94 



 

 

APPENDIX– 3 
[ See Rule 52] 

 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF DETAILED  

ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURE FROM THE CONSOLIDATED FUND 
 
 
 
 
1. For purpose of Budget Estimates, expenditure from the Consolidated Fund –with the merger of Plan and Non- 

Plan from Budget 2017-18 will comprise of expenditure on revenue account and on capital account including 
loans and advances, and shown in the separate categories as applicable, comprising of I. Central Expenditure: 
(i) Secretariat Expenditure; (ii) Central Sector Schemes and (iii) Other Central Expenditure and II. Transfers: 
(i) Centrally Sponsored Schemes (ii) Finance Commission Transfers and (iii) Other Transfers. 

 
A. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
 
2. To facilitate appropriate scrutiny and consolidation of Expenditure Estimates for reporting to the Ministry of 

Finance, the Financial Adviser in each Ministry / Department will obtain detailed estimates and other supporting 
data from each of the estimating authorities under the control of the Ministry / Department, in appropriate 
forms, sufficiently in advance. 

3. The framing of the Revised Estimates for the current year should always precede estimation for the ensuing 
year. The Revised Estimates should be framed with great care to include only those items which are likely to 
materialize for payment during the current year, in the light of (i) actuals so far recorded during the current 
year, compared with the actuals for corresponding period of the last and previous years, (ii) seasonal character 
or otherwise of the nature of expenditure, (iii) sanctions for expenditure and orders of appropriation or re- 
appropriation already issued or contemplated and (iv) any other relevant factor, decision or development. 
The Budget Estimate for the ensuing year should likewise be prepared on the basis of what is expected to be 
paid, under proper sanction, during the ensuring year, including arrears of previous years, if any. Due attention 
to considerations of economy must be paid and while all inescapable and foreseeable expenditures should be 
provided for, care should be taken that the estimate is not influenced by undue optimism. 

4. No lump sum provision will be made in the Budget except where urgent measures are to be provided for 
meeting emergent situations or for meeting preliminary expenses on a project/scheme which has been 
accepted in principle for being taken up in the financial year. In latter cases Budget provision will be limited to 
the requirements of preliminary expenses and for such initial outlay, as, for example, on collection of material, 
recruitment of skeleton staff, etc. 
Provision for a 'token' demand should not be made in the Budget Estimates for the purpose of seeking approval 
in principle for big schemes without the full financial implications being worked out and got approved by the 
appropriate authorities. In accordance with instructions contained in Paragraph (viii) of Appendix (5), a 'token' 
demand can be made during the course of a year for a project / scheme when the details thereof are ready 
and funds are also available for undertaking it but it cannot be started without Parliament's approval, it being 
in the nature of a 'New Service/New Instrument of Services'. 

5. All estimates should be prepared on gross basis and 'voted' and 'charged' portions must be shown separately; 
even expenditure met partly or fully from receipts taken in reduction of such expenditure or those 
counterbalanced by receipts credited as revenue to the Consolidated Fund, must be reported in such estimates 
on gross basis. Care should also be taken to ensure that all notional receipts reported in 'Receipt Estimates' 
(such as interest receipts fully or partly subsidized, loan repayment receipts partly or fully refinanced through 
further loans or conversions into equity, receipts of foreign grant assistance in the form of commodities or 
material, etc.) are properly matched by adequate provisions in expenditure estimates. 

6. The estimates of expenditure should include all items which are fully accounted for in the accounts of the 
Ministry/Departments to which the estimating authority is subordinate; they shall also cover expenditure, if any, 
in Union Territories without Legislature, whether provided for in the demands of the said Ministry / Department 
or in the 'Area' demand of the concerned Union Territory. Estimates of 'Works Expenditure', if any, against the 
provisions in the demands of the Ministry of Urban Development, as well as expenditure on pensions (including 
commutation payments, gratuity payments, pension contributions, etc.) interest payments, loans and 
advancesto Government servants, etc., which are provided for in the centralized Grants/Appropriations 
controlled by the Ministry of Finance should be furnished to the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry 
of Finance. 

7. The estimate of establishment charges should be framed taking into account the trends over preceding three 
years and other relevant factors like changes in rates of pay, allowances, number of posts and their filling and 
the economy instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time. 

 95 



 

8. Expenditure estimates will be prepared with full accounts classification, i.e., Major/Sub-Major Head, Minor 
Head, Sub-Head, Detailed Head and Object Head of Account. The correctness of accounts classification must 
be ensured by the Principal Chief Controller / Chief Controller/ Controller of Accounts in each case. Doubts, if 
any, may be clarified beforehand in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Budget Division and Controller 
General of Accounts. The relevant Grant number and title of Appropriation should also be mentioned to 
facilitate identification of the provision in Budget Estimates for the current year. 

9. Unless otherwise indicated by the Ministry of Finance, estimates (both Revised Estimates for the current year 
and Budget Estimates for the ensuing year) should reach the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic 
Affairs, Budget Division, by the date prescribed by the Ministry of Finance, each year, in triplicate in Form GFR 
4, a separate form being used for each Major Head of Account. 

10. To facilitate appreciation and scrutiny of the estimates, any major variations between the Budget and Revised 
Estimates for the current year and also between the Revised Estimates for the current year and Budget 
Estimates for the ensuing year should be explained cogently. In particular, all provisions for subsidy, capital 
investment or loan to a Public Sector Undertaking, must be explained by indicating their purpose and the 
extent to which they are intended to cover losses, working capital needs, debt or interest liabilities of the 
undertaking. 

11. Wherever the proposed estimates attract the limitations of 'New Service/New Instrument of Service', the fact 
must be specifically highlighted. The guidelines to be followed in this regard are indicated in Annexure - I to 
this Appendix. For all 'new' schemes, other than purely 'works' projects, the estimates proposed should be 
supported by details set out in Annexure - II to this Appendix. In the case of provisions of 'Grants-in-aid' to 
non- Government entities, the full purpose thereof and the nature of the grants, whether recurring or non-
recurring, should also be indicated. 

12. All provisions for transfer of Government assets to Public Sector Undertaking and other non-Government 
entities must also be highlighted, indicating whether the transfer is by way of grants or by way of equity 
investment or loan. Similarly, in the case of nationalization or take-over of any private sector assets, the related 
provisions in estimates must be supported by full details, such as the effective date of take-over, the agreed 
compensation amount and the manner of its payment, etc. In cases of takeover, where the assets are 
simultaneously transferred to a Public Sector Undertaking, it must be ensured that the estimates provide for 
(i) payment of compensation for the take-over, (ii) for transfer of assets to the Public Sector Undertaking, by 
means of recovery of compensation payment to be taken in reduction of expenditure, and (iii) provisions for 
equity or loan to the Public Sector Undertaking. 

 
B. SCHEME RELATED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES 
 
13. The Budget Division through the yearly Budget Circular will prescribe the form and the manner in which 

proposals are required to be submitted to them for determining the scheme allocations,(both Central Sector 
Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes) for the ensuing year. The Financial Adviser in each Ministry / 
Department of the Central Government will accordingly call for requisite data from the estimating authorities, 
public sector and other enterprises under the control of the Ministry / Department, etc. The approved 
allocations for Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be communicated by the Ministry of 
Finance to the Central Ministries / Department. Ministries/ Departments will finalize the Statement of Budget 
Estimates, indicating the total outlay approved for each scheme / organization and the extent to which it is to 
be met from extra-budget resources and from provisions in the Demands for Grants. 

14. Subject to such directions as may be issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time, the Revised Estimates 
for the current year and Budget Estimates of the ensuing year, in respect of Scheme provisions, are to be sent 
to the Ministry of Finance in Form GFR 7. For furnishing these estimates, instructions for preparation and 
submission of Other than scheme Expenditure Estimates will apply to the extent relevant; in addition, the 
following points should also be borne in mind :- 
(i) Such part of the approved budgetary support for Scheme outlay as relates to 'works expenditure' and has 

been accepted by the Ministry of Urban Development for inclusion in their Demands for Grants should be 
excluded by the other Ministries / Departments in reporting the estimates to the Ministry of Finance in 
Form GFR 4. 

(ii) In the case of, provisions for equity investments and loans to public sector and other enterprises, as well 
as those for grants-in-aid, specific schemes, for which the outlay is provided and the extent for each of 
them is also to be indicated clearly. 

(iii) Provisions for Scheme expenditure on Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, 
including such expenditures in Union Territories, are to be included in the relevant demand of the 
Administrative Ministry/ Department and not in 'Area' Demand of the concerned Union Territory. 

 96 



 

 

ANNEXURE –I TO APPENDIX-3 
(Refer: Ministry of Finance, Budget Division's OM No. F.1(22)-B(AC)/2022 dated 23.02.2024 
and Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure OM no. 01(14)/2016-E.II(A)(Vol.III) dated 

01.04.2024 
[ See Paragraph 11 of Appendix – 3/Rule 63 ] 

 
FINANCIAL LIMITS TO BE OBSERVED DETERMINING CASES 

RELATING TO “NEW SERVICE”/NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE 
 
New Service (NS) 
 
1. All new services [except for the new ‘Works’ under Capital section] shall be considered as ‘New Service’ 
as defined in Article 115 of the Constitution and shall accordingly need prior approval of the Parliament; 
 
2. In case of services falling under the category of new works under Capital section (currently classified as 
Land/Building/Machine in line with Rule 8 of the Delegation of Financial Powers as amended through Ministry of 
Finance Gazette Notification dated 16.12.2022), the financial limits for the ‘New Service’ shall be as under: 
 

Object Heads Reporting Limit Prior Approval of Parliament 

1 2 3 
1. Machinery & Equipment; Above ₹ 50 crore but not exceeding ₹ Above ₹ 100 crore, subject to 
2. ICT Equipment; 100 crore, subject to savings within savings within same section of 
3. Building and Structure; same section of the Grant the Grant 
4. Infrastructural Assets; 
5. Arms and Ammunitions; 

and 
6. Land 

 
New Instrument of Service (NIS) 
 
3. The financial limits for the ‘New Instrument of Service’ shall be as under: 
 

Object Heads Reporting Limit Prior Approval of Parliament 

1. 2. 3. 

1. Investment; upto 20% of the original appropriation*  Above 20% of the original 
2. Loans and advances;  appropriation (15-digit line item)  
3. Subsidies; OR  
4. Machinery and equipment;  OR 
5. ICT Equipment; upto ₹ 100 crore whichever is higher  
6. Building and Structures; [subject to savings within same section of Above ₹ 100 crore, whichever is 
7. Infrastructure assets; the Grant] higher 
8. Arms and ammunitions [subject to savings within same 
9. Land; section of the Grant] 
10. GIA Capex; 
11. GIA General; 
12. GIA Salary 

 
All other Object Heads Each case to be decided on merits 

(see para 2 & 3 of the OM No. 1(22)-B(AC)/2022 dated 23.02.2024) 
  *refers to the 15-digit numeric code in respect of civil Ministries or final unit of appropriation available in the Detailed Demand      
   for Grants in respect of non-civil Ministries 
 
 
   
 

 97 



 

 

ANNEXURE - II TO APPENDIX - 3 
[ See Paragraph 11 of Appendix - 3/Rule 63 ] 

 
 
 

MEMORANDUM FOR PROPOSALS INVOLVING  
EXPENDITURE ON NEW SERVICE OR NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE 

 
 Government of India 

Ministry of....................................... 
Department of................................. 
New Delhi, the................................ 

 
 
MEMORANDUM 
1. Statement of proposal : 
(a) Title of the proposal / scheme. 
(b) Description of the proposal / scheme and its objects. 
(c) Justification for the proposal / scheme and what alternatives have been considered. 

(d) Description of the manner in which the proposal / scheme is proposed to be implemented including 
mention of agency through which the scheme will be executed. 

(e) Schedule of programme and target date of completion. 
2. Financial implications of the proposal: 
(a) Nature of the scheme (Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored – or Others.) 
(b) Total outlay (recurring and non-recurring separately), its broad details and its year-wise phasing. 
(c) (i) Budget allocation, in a scheme; and 

(ii) Budget provision in the current financial year; 
if no Budget provision exists, how is the expenditure proposed to be met? 

(d) Foreign exchange component of the outlay and how it is proposed to be met. 
(e) Component of grant, loan and subsidy, if any, in the total outlay involved and their proposed terms. 
(f) Number of posts, their pay scales and the basis adopted for staffing (Statement attached). 

(g) Broad details of construction works, their justification and basis of estimates (Statement attached).  
(h) Requirement of stores and equipment together with justification and cost (Statement attached). 
       (i) Achievement / return expected and other economic implications, if any. 

3. (a) Comments, if any, of the NITI Aayog (for Schemes only). 
(b) Comments, if any, of other Ministries / Departments which may have been consulted. 

4. Supplementary information, if any. 
5. Points on which decision / sanctions are required.  
 
 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
 

Ministry of........................................ 
Department of.................................. 

 98 



 

 

APPENDIX – 4 
[See Note below Rule 52] 

 
PROCEDURE FOR COMPILATION OF  
DETAILED DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 

 
 
 
1. The Demand for Grants are presented to Parliament at two levels. The Main Demands for Grants are presented 

to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance along with the Annual Financial Statement while the Detailed Demands 
for Grants are laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha by the concerned Ministries a few days in advance of the 
discussion of the respective Ministries Demands in that House. 
Both the Main Demands for Grants as also the Detailed Demands for Grants comprise three parts each, viz.- 
Part - I shows the Service for which the Demand (or Appropriation) is intended and the estimates of the gross 
amount, separately for Voted and Charged Expenditure, under Revenue and Capital (including Loan) sections 
required in the ensuing year in respect of that Service. 
Part - II shows break up of the estimates separately. In the Main Demands for Grants, the break up is exhibited 
up to the level of Major Heads of Account which correspond to functions of the Government. 
In the Detailed Demands for Grants the break up in respect of activities/schemes/organization up to the object 
head level is given. 
The Detailed Demands for Grants also exhibit actuals of the previous year in Part - II. 
Both in the Main Demands for Grants as well as in the Detailed Demands for Grants, the details of recoveries 
taken in reduction of expenditure provided for in the Demand or Appropriation are also depicted. 

2. All Detailed Demands for Grants of a Ministry / Department are consolidated in a single volume and presented 
to Lok Sabha by the concerned Ministry / Department. The Detailed Demands show ‘actual expenditure’ as 
per accounts in the previous year, Budget and Revised Estimates for the current years and Budget Estimates 
for the ensuing year. 
(i) The process of compilation should start in July / August with the preparation of a manuscript skeleton. 

Manuscript skeletons of Detailed Demands for the ensuing year should be prepared by using the printed 
Detailed Demands for the current year by making necessary alterations therein. New sub-heads 
sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance, if any, and those expected to be required should also be added in 
the manuscript at appropriate places. The manuscript should then be sent to the designated press for a 
proof. Where necessary, a second proof may be obtained. The printed skeletons should be available with 
the Ministries/ Departments preferably by the 15th October each year. 

(ii) Two copies of the Demand skeleton may then be sent to the Principal Accounts Officer, as the case may 
be, for filling the ‘Actuals’ column for the previous year and to return one copy duly filled in. 

(iii) In the master copy of the Demand, the Ministry / Department will then post (1) the figures of actuals as 
reported by the Principal Accounts Officer / Accountant-General; (2) Revised Estimates for the current 
year and the Budget Estimates for the ensuing year from the office copy of the SBEs /Demands for Grants 
sent to Ministry of Finance. While posting these entries, care should be taken to ensure that – 

(a) “Charged” items are shown in italics and are not mixed up with “Voted” provisions; 
(b) posting is done accurately against the proper item / head of account including “recoveries”, if any, 

taken as reduction of expenditure; 
(c) new items are inserted at the proper place under the relevant minor head; 

(d) totals of sub-heads, minor heads, major heads, etc., are correctly worked out and posted; that totals 
of Revenue section and Capital section as well as the grand totals are correct and show “Charged” 
and “Voted” figures distinctly; and 

(e) new sub-head (opened through Supplementary Demands) or otherwise or any change in the 
numbering and nomenclature sanctioned by the Budget Division since the proof of the skeleton 
should also be incorporated in the Master Copy. 

NOTE :–A sub-head should appear in the Demand only when there is provision thereunder, either in the 
current year(Budget or Revised) or the ensuing year. Wherever only actuals of the previous year pertaining 
to a sub-head are to be exhibited, this should be done by inserting suitable footnote on the relevant page. 

(iv) The process of compilation and printing of the Demands should be undertaken in stages. 
3. The first proof of individual Demands may be obtained after posting actuals of previous year and other than 

Scheme estimates (by 15th December). The second proof may be similarly obtained (by 15th January) after 
”Scheme” Revised estimates are posted in the first proof. As soon as “Scheme” provisions for the ensuing year 
are finalized and communicated by the Ministry of Finance, they should be posted in the second proof. Before 
obtaining the third proof, the following material may also be added. 

 
 

 99 



 

 
 
(A) Main Demands for Grants : 

(i) Notes on the Demands for Grants highlighting the following :- 
(a) The objectives of the concerned Ministry / Department, how the programmes undertaken or 

contemplated contribute towards attainment of such objectives and the agencies entrusted with the 
execution of such programmes; 

(b) Details of important provisions included in Demands for Grants with particular emphasis on Scheme 
provisions and new items of expenditure; 

(c) Cogent reasons for significant variations between the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates for 
the current year and between the Revised Estimates, for the current year and the Budget Estimates 
for the ensuing year; 

(d) Provisions for subsidy in lieu of interest on loans by the Government or token provisions for 
concessional rate of interest along with number of likely cases involved and financial implications, 
if determinable; and 

(e) Complete details of the estimated cost of a project together with its economics and financial 
implications (whenever these estimates are revised and the cost of escalation exceeds 20 per cent 
of the sanctioned cost or Rs. 3 crores, whichever is more, full reasons therefor and the effect thereof 
on the economics of the projects should also be included in the Notes on Demands). 

(ii) A statement giving details of provisions in the Budget which attract limitations of “New Service”/”New 
Instrument of Service”. 

(B) Detailed Demands for Grants : 
The Detailed Demands for Grants will be accompanied by the following schedules/ statements:- 
(i) Schedule showing the estimated strength of establishment and provision therefor. 
(ii) Statement showing project-wise provision for expenditure on externally aided projects in the Central 

Schemes. 
(iii) Schedule showing provision for payment of grants in aid to non-Government bodies. 
(iv) Statement showing details of individual works and projects costing Rs. 5 crore or above. 
(v) Statement showing revised cost estimates of projects of public sector enterprises and departmental 

undertakings. 
(vi) Statement showing transfer or gift of Government properties of value exceeding Rs. 5 lakhs to non- 

Government bodies. 
(vii) Statement showing contributions to International bodies. This statement will include only items of 

contribution, membership fees to international bodies, which constitute revenue expenditure. Subscriptions 
to international bodies, which represent investments and are accounted for in the Capital section, are to be 
excluded from it. 

(viii)Statement showing guarantees given by the Central Government and outstanding as on 31st March of 
the preceding year. 

(ix) Statement showing grants-in-aid exceeding Rs. 5 lakhs (recurring ) or Rs. 10 lakhs (non-recurring) actually 
sanctioned to private institutions/organizations/ individuals. 

4. In addition the Detailed Demands for Grants will also include where necessary, “Notes on Important Projects 
and Schemes”, e.g., where the Ministry / Department do not bring out performance Budgets. 

5. The third proof on receipt from the press should be thoroughly checked for accuracy of all estimates and other 
data, as these must necessarily conform with the main Demands for Grants. Therefore, for obtaining page 
proof, all pages should be serially numbered and table of contents prepared. The page proof received from the 
Press should be fully scrutinized. 

6. A sample printed copy of the Demands should be scrutinized on receipt from Press and where necessary an 
errata may be prepared, got printed and pasted by the Press in individual copies of the Printed Demands. 

7. The Demands of smaller Departments like Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Department of Parliamentary Affairs, 
Staff, Household and Allowances of the President, Secretariat of the Vice-President and Union Public Service 
Commission which are clubbed in a single volume are to be prepared and presented by the Ministry of Finance. 

 100 



 

 

APPENDIX – 5 
[Rule 66] 

 
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN CONNECTION  

WITH THE DEMANDS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS 
 
 
 
 
An excess over the sanctioned Grant or Appropriation may arise owing to either – 
(a) an unforeseen emergency; or 
(b) under-estimated or insufficient allowance for factors leading to the growth of expenditure. In the case of an 

excess of either type the Head of the Department or the Controlling Officer concerned should proceed as 
follows :- 
(i) He should, in the first place, examine the allotments given to other Disbursing Officers under the same 

detailed head within the unit of appropriation, and transfer to the Disbursing Officer who requires an 
additional allotment such sum as can be permanently or temporarily spared. Since appropriation audit is 
ordinarily conducted against total allotments for a unit, re-appropriation in the technical sense of the word 
is not involved in such cases. The process amounts only to redistribution which the Controlling Officer can 
ordinarily effect without reference to any other authority. 

(ii) Should he find such redistribution impossible he should examine the allotments against other detailed 
heads inside the primary units of appropriation, with the object of discovering probable savings and effecting 
a transfer. Where such redistribution is feasible, he should if he has been vested with the necessary powers, 
carry it out. Otherwise, he should obtain the sanction of the competent authority. 

(iii)If the provision of funds from within the primary units proves to be impossible, an examination of the whole 
grant should be undertaken to see whether there are likely to be savings under any of the other units of 
grant or appropriation which can be utilized to meet it. If so, he should proceed as indicated in Clause (ii) 
above. 

(iv)If such savings are not available, it should be seen whether special economies can be effected under other 
primary units of appropriation. If funds cannot be provided by either of these methods, it will have to be 
considered whether the excess should be met by postponement of expenditure or whether an application 
for supplementary grant or appropriation should be made. 

(v) The Supplementary Demand for Grants shall be presented to the Parliament in a number of batches as 
decided by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. The first batch shall normally consist 
of requirements of the following nature :- 
(a) Cases where advances from Contingency Fund of India have been granted, which are required to 

be recouped to the Fund. 
(b) Payment against a court decree, which cannot be postponed; and 
(c) Cases of additional requirement of funds for making immediate payments, which can be met by re- 

appropriation of savings in the Grant but attract the limitation of New Service / New Instrument of 
Service. 

(vi)All applications for supplementary grants or appropriations should be submitted by the Department of the 
Central Government administratively concerned to the Ministry of Finance on such dates and in such forms 
/ batches as may be prescribed by the latter from time to time. 

(vii)On receipt of an application for a supplementary grant, the Ministry of Finance will review the position of 
the grant of appropriation as a whole with reference to the known actuals of the year to date and the actuals 
and estimates for previous years. If after this examination, the Ministry of Finance comes to the conclusion 
that it should be possible for the Administrative Department to meet the expenditure from within the 
sanctioned grant either from normal savings or by special economies or in the last resort by judicious 
postponement of other expenditure or in the last resort by judicious postponement of other expenditure, the 
Administrative Department will be so informed and no supplementary demand will be presented to 
Parliament. If, on the other hand, the Ministry of Finance considers that a supplementary grant will be 
necessary, a demand will be placed before Parliament. 

(viii) If during the course of the year it is found necessary to incur expenditure on a ‘New Service’ not provided for 
in the annual budget the Administrative Department shall explain to the Ministry of Finance why the expenditure 
was not provided for in the original budget and why it cannot be postponed for consideration in connection with 
the next budget. The Ministry of Finance, if satisfied on these points, will consider whether it would not be 
reasonable to ask the department concerned to curtail its other expenditure so as to keep the total within the 
grant. Ordinarily, no “new service” or item will be accepted by the Ministry of Finance, unless the department 
concerned can guarantee that the extra expenditure will be met from normal savings or by special economies 
within the grant. Cases which involve additional grant will normally be accepted by the Ministry of Finance only 

 101 



 

if they relate to matters of real imperative necessity or to the earning or safeguarding of revenue. The demand 
for a supplementary grant of appropriation or a token vote in respect of a “new service” will be presented to 
Parliament as soon as practicable after the need arises. 

 
NOTE. –The expression ‘New Service’ wherever used in this Appendix includes – ‘New Instrument of Service’. 

 102 



 

 

APPENDIX – 6 
[Rule 67. (4)] 

 
 

THE CONTIGENCY FUND OF INDIA RULES 
 
 
 
 
SRO 1358. - In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 4 of the Contingency Fund of India Act, 1950 (XLIXof 

1950), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules:- 
 
CONTINGENCY FUND OF INDIA RULES 
 
1. These rules may be called the Contingency Fund of India Rules. 
2. The Contingency Fund of India shall be held on behalf of the President by the Secretary to the Government of 

India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. 
3. An amount equivalent to forty per cent of the Fund corpus shall be placed at the disposal of the Secretary, 

Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenditure, and 
beyond this limit, all further Contingency Fund releases shall be made with the approval of Secretary to the 
Government of India, Department of Economic Affairs, after the approval of Secretary to the Government of 
India, Department of Expenditure. 

4. Subject to the provisions of Rule 5 below, all applications for advances from the Fund shall be made to the 
Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure. The applications shall 
give - 

(i) brief particulars of the additional expenditure involved, 
(ii) the circumstances in which provision could not be included in the budget, 
(iii) why its postponement is not possible, 

(iv) the amount required to be advanced from the Fund with full cost of the proposal for the year or part of the 
year, as the case may be, and 

(v) the grant or appropriation under which supplementary provision will eventually have to be obtained. 
5. Applications for advances required shall be made to the Secretary to the Government of India, Department of 

Expenditure and applications for advances of new loans shall be made to the Secretary to the Government of 
India, Department of Economic Affairs, in the manner provided for in Rule 4. 

6. Advances from the Fund shall be made for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenditure including 
expenditure on a new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement. 

7. A copy of the order sanctioning the advance, which shall specify the amount, the grant or appropriation to 
which it relates and give brief particulars by sub-heads and units of appropriation of the expenditure for meeting 
which it is made, shall be forwarded by the Ministry of Finance to the Audit and Accounts Officers concerned.  

8. (1) All expenditure so financed shall be regularized through the Supplementary Estimates presented to 
Parliament unless such advance has been resumed to the Contingency Fund in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-rule (2). 
NOTE 1. -While presenting to Parliament Estimates for expenditure financed from the Contingency Fund, 
a note to the following effect shall be appended to such Estimates :- 
‘A sum of Rs………………………… has been advanced from the Contingency Fund in 
………………………and an equivalent amount is required to enable repayment to be made to that Fund.’  
NOTE 2. -If the expenditure on a new service not contemplated in the Annual Financial Statement can be 
met, ‘wholly or partly’ from savings available within the authorized appropriation, the note appended to the 
Estimates submitted shall be in the following form :- 
‘The expenditure is on a new service. A sum of Rs…………………… has been advanced from 
Contingency Fund in……………….. and an equivalent amount is required to enable repayment to be 
made to that Fund.’ The amount, viz., Rs…………………….. can be found by re-appropriation. 
‘A part of that amount, viz., Rs…………………………..of savings within the grant and a token vote only is 

now 
required, viz., Rs…………………………. only. 
a vote is required for the balance 

(2) As soon as Parliament has authorized additional expenditure by means of a Supplementary Appropriation 
Act, the advance or advances made from the Contingency Fund, whether for meeting the expenditure 
incurred before the Supplementary Estimates were presented to the Parliament or after they were so 
presented, shall be resumed to the Fund to the full extent of the appropriation made in Act. 

8. A. If in any case, after the order sanctioning an advance from the Contingency Fund has been issued in 

 103 



 

accordance with Rule 7 and before action is taken in accordance with Rule 8, it is found that the advance 
sanctioned will remain wholly or partly unutilized, an application shall be made to the sanctioning authority for 
cancelling or modifying the sanction, as the case may be. 

8. B.All advances sanctioned from the Contingency Fund to meet expenditure in excess of the provision for the 
service included in an Appropriation (Vote on Accounts) Act shall be resumed to the Contingency Fund as 
soon as the Appropriation Act in respect of the expenditure on the service for the whole year, including the 
excess met from the advances from the Contingency Fund has been passed. 

8. C. If during an Election year, two Budgets are presented to the Parliament, all advances, sanctioned from the 
Contingency Fund of India during the period between the presentation of first and second Budgets or during 
the period between the presentation of the second Budget and the passing of the connected Appropriation Act 
to meet expenditure on a service not included in an Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act and the advances 
outstanding at the end of the preceding financial year being advances the estimates for which are included in 
the second Budget, shall be resumed to the Contingency Fund as soon as the Appropriation Act in respect of 
the expenditure on the service for the whole year has been passed. 
NOTE.-A suitable explanation regarding the advance and the recoupment thereof shall be incorporated in the 
“Notes on Demands for Grants”. Wherever required, such a case will be included in the statement of ‘New 
Service’ / ‘New Instrument of Service’ appended at the end of the demands. 

9. A copy of the order resuming the advance, which shall give a reference to the number and date of the order in 
which the original advance was made and to the Supplementary Appropriation Act referred to in Rule 8, shall 
be forwarded by the Ministry of Finance and the Financial Officers concerned, in addition, to the Audit and 
Accounts Officers concerned. In addition, the Ministry of Finance shall forward copies of such orders to the 
Accountant General, Central Revenues, and the Director of Railways Audit if pertaining to the Railways. 

10. An account of the transactions of the Fund shall be maintained by the Ministry of Finance in Form ‘A’ annexed 
to these rules. 

11. Actual expenditure incurred against advances from the Contingency Fund shall be recorded in the account 
relating to the Contingency Fund in the same details as it would have been shown if it had been paid out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[Updated vide DoE’s OM No.8(18)/2021/E.II.A dated 06.05.2022 in view of DEA OM F.No.4(13)-B(SD)/2021 dated 18.04.2022] 

 104 



 

ANNEXURE FORM ‘A’ 
[See Paragraph 10 of Appendix-6] 

 
 

CONTINGENCY FUND OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Amount of the Fund       Rs........................................................ 
 
 

           
SI. Date of Number and Number Number Amount Supplementary Amount of Balance  Initials of Remarks 
No. transaction name of and and  of Appropriation advance after each Officer-in-

Grant of date of the date of advance act providing resumed transaction charge 
appropriation application the resumed for the 

for order Additional 
advance making Expenditure 

the 
advance 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) 

           

 
NOTE1.-Thebalance should be struck after each transaction. 
NOTE2.-The amount of the advances should be entered in Black ink when made and in red ink when resumed. 

 105 



 

APPENDIX - 7 
[See Rule 310 (4) and 310 (5) ] 

 
TRANSFER OF LAND AND BUILDINGS BETWEEN  

THE UNION AND STATE GOVERNMENTS 
 
 
 
 
1. These rules apply to the transfer of land and buildings between the Union and the State Governments and 

also to the surrender to the State Governments of land belonging to Railways. 
The general position under Article 294 of the Constitution is that as from the commencement of the Constitution 
- 
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for the 
purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and all property and assets which immediately before 
such commencement were vested in His Majesty for the purpose of the Government of each Governor’s 
Province, shall vest respectively in the Union and the corresponding State; and all rights, liabilities and 
obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor’s Province, 
whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of 
the Government of India and the Government of each corresponding State subject to any adjustment made or 
to be made by reason of the creation before the commencement of the construction of the Dominion of 
Pakistan or of the Province, of West Bengal, West Punjab and East Punjab. 
Article 294, as is evident, relates to succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain 
cases only; Article 295 of the Constitution which relate to succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and 
obligations in other cases, provides that - 
(i) As from the commencement of the Constitution: 

(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in any Indian 
State corresponding to a State specified in Part -B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union if 
specified in Part - B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union if the purpose for which such property 
and assets were held immediately before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the 
Union relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List; and 

(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any Indian State corresponding to a State 
specified in Part -B of the First Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the 
rights, liabilities and obligations of the Union Government, if the purposes for which such rights were 
acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred before such commencement will thereafter be 
purposes of the Union Government relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List: 
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Union Government with the Government 
of that State. 

(ii) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule shall, as from 
the commencement of the Constitution, be the successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian 
State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in Clause (1). 
All property and assets, which include land and buildings, and which vest in the State Government under 
Articles 294 and 295 of the Constitution or otherwise shall be at the disposal of the respective State 
Governments, who will be at liberty to dispose them of by sale, mortgage, etc., and the proceeds thereof 
shall be credited to the revenues of the respective State Governments. 
From the commencement of the Constitution, the transfer of land between the Union and the State 
Government shall be regulated by mutual agreement except when they are acquired under some Act. The 
Union Government have laid down the following principles to be observed in regard to certain points :- 
(i)(a) When land belonging to a private party has to be acquired on behalf of the Union Government 

acquisition shall be at the expense of that Government. 
(b) In cases where the Union Government require any land, which is in occupation of the State 

Government, to be transferred to them, the amount payable by the Union Government will ordinarily 
be the market value of the land and buildings, if any, thereon. 

(c) The amount payable will include the capitalized value of land revenue assessable on the land when 
the transfer causes actual loss of land revenue to the State Government. 

(d) Solatium of 15 per cent payable under the Land Acquisition Act will not apply to such transfers. 
(ii)Land surplus to the requirements of the Union Government:- When the Union Government no longer 
required land in their possession, the Government of the State in which it is situated will be given the option 
of assuming possession of the whole or any portion thereof subject to the following conditions:- 
(a) the Union government themselves shall be the judges of whether they require to retain any particular 

land or not; 

 108 



 

(b) if the State Government desire to assume possession of the land, the option to do so shall be exercised 
within six months of the date on which the Union Government signify their intention of surrendering the 
land; 

(c) the amount payable for the land will in all cases be its market value at the date of transfer; 
(d) when the State Government desire to assume possession of only a portion of the land surrendered, 

they shall be entitled to do so only if the value of the land as a whole is not materially reduced by the 
division; and 

(e) if the State Government do not desire to assume possession of any land on the foregoing terms, the 
Union Government will be free to dispose it of to a third party. Before, however, so disposing of the 
land, the Union Government will consult the State Government as to the levy of ground rent or 
assessment and the conditions, if any, subject to which it should be sold and they will, as far as 
possible, dispose of the land subject to the conditions which the State Government may desire to 
impose. The Union Government are not, however, bound to obtain the concurrence of the State 
Government in all cases, and in cases of disagreement the Union Government shall be the sole judge 
of the terms and conditions to be imposed. 

(i) Determination of Disputes as to Titles. - Disputes as to title between the Union Government and a State 
Government shall be determined by the Supreme Court. 

2. Market value defined. -Market value when applied to land may be defined as the price which the land would 
fetch if sold in the open market subject to the ground rent or assessment shown against it in the revenue 
registers, or, if no ground rent or assessment shown against it in the revenue registers, subject to a ground 
rent or assessment levied at the rate at which ground rent or assessment is actually being levied on similar 
lands in the neighbourhood excluding all cases in which such similar lands in the neighbourhood are held 
free of ground rent or assessment at favourable or unfavourable rates of ground or assessment. This is the 
market value which has to be credited or debited, as the case may be, in the case of all transactions 
between the State Governments and the Union Government or between the Union Government and State 
Governments or the Railways. 

 109 



 

APPENDIX - 8 
[ See Rule 286. (3) and Rule311] 

 
CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS AND OTHER TRUSTS 

I. CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS 
 
 
 
 
1. The duties of the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India are prescribed in the Charitable Endowments 

Act, 1890 (Act VI of 1890), and the rules framed thereunder, which are printed as an Annexure hereto. 
2. Under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Charitable Endowments Act, the Deputy Secretary/Director (Budget) 

in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, nominated for the purpose, has been appointed 
ex officio to be the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India with effect from the 1st April, 1954. All the 
property of Charitable Endowments, the objects of which extend beyond a single State or which are objects to 
which the executive authority of the Central Government extend, vest in him. 
The Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India is authorized to employ the agency of the Treasurer of 
Charitable Endowments of a State, with the consent of the State Governments, for discharging any of the 
functions assigned to him under the rules referred to in Paragraph 1 above. 

3. When a copy of a vesting order is received by the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India, he should at 
once place himself in communication with the persons who appear from the order to be the holders of the 
documents of title relating to the property or of the securities mentioned in the order, and request them to 
forward the Title Deeds, or securities in a registered cover and to insure the cover for Rs. 100. These do not 
require to be endorsed, as the vesting order operates to transfer the securities to the Treasurer. 

4. At every change of Office of the Deputy Secretary/Director (Budget) in the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Economic Affairs nominated for the purpose, a formal transfer of charge of the Treasurer of Charitable 
Endowments for India should also take place and as separate charge report, supported by a statement of the 
total of the balances of the Funds vested in the Treasurer, duly signed by the relieved and the relieving 
Treasurers should be sent to Government. 
A list of receipts granted by the Reserve Bank in acknowledgement of the securities forwarded to it for safe 
custody as also of the securities kept in the custody of the Treasurer should also be prepared and signed by 
the relieved and the relieving Treasurers, and sent to Government along with the charge report. 
NOTE. -Whenever there is a change in the Office of a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments of a State who 
has been acting as an agent of the treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India, a charge report prepared in 
the manner indicated in this paragraph should be furnished to the latter. 

 
II. MISCELLANEOUS TRUST ACCOUNTS 
 
5. If, under any general or special orders of Government, an Audit Officer / Accounts Officer or any other 

Government officer is required to act in his official capacity as a Trustee or Depository of any public or quasi- 
public fund, which does come within the scope of the accounts of Government, or of any Charitable 
Endowment and is not a Government security held in trust under the rules in Chapter IX of the Government 
Securities Manual, such an officer should endeavour to have the trust vested, if possible, in the Treasurer of 
Charitable Endowments for India; but, if that course is not possible, he should open an account with the State 
Bank of India, or with any other approved Bank, for the deposit of moneys received by him on account of Trust. 
Full and clear record of all transactions relating to the trust fund should be kept in the books of accounts in his 
personal custody in a form complying with the terms and conditions of the Trust. The securities, if any, 
deposited with him should be dealt with in accordance with the instructions contained in Chapter IX of the 
Government Securities Manual. 

6. The books of accounts should be supported by a short statement descriptive of the nature and obligation of 
the Trust, with reference to the documents bearing upon it, so that any other Government officer on receiving 
charge may know by reference to it exactly what his obligations are in the matter. 
NOTE. -The receipt and disposal of interest should be recorded in these accounts which are meant for the 
principal of the Trusts only. 

7. The accounts should be balanced and closed every 31st day of March. They should also be balanced and 
closed when the Government officer acting as the Trustee makes over charge of his office to a successor or 
substitute, a balance sheet being appended to the charge report and signed both by the officer receiving and 
the officer giving over charge. 

8. The accounts will be subject to such audit check as may be prescribed by Government. 

110 
 



 

 
 

ANNEXURE 
[ See Paragraph 1 of Appendix -8 ] 

 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 13 of the 

Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (VI of 1890), and in supersession of the late Home 
Department Notification No. 1569 - Judicial, dated the 24th October, 1890, the Central 

Government is pleased to make the following rules and forms :- 
 

THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS (CENTRAL) RULES, 1942 
 
1. Short Title. - 

(1) These rules may be called the Charitable Endowments (Central) Rules, 1942. 
(2) They apply to charitable endowments the objects of which extend beyond a single State or are objects, to 

which the executive authority of the Central Government extends. 
2. Interpretation.- In these rules - 

(a) “the Act” means the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890; 
(b) “Treasurer” means the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India for the time being, appointed under 

sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act, and includes such other officer as the Treasurer may appoint to 
discharge any of the functions assigned to him under these rules; 

(c) “Form” means a form appended to these rules. 
3. Previous publication of vesting orders and schemes.-On cases in which private persons apply for a vesting 

order or a scheme or modification of a scheme, and in all cases in which it is proposed to depart in any respect 
from the ascertained wishes or presumable intentions of the founder of an endowment, there shall ordinarily, 
and unless the Central Government otherwise directs, be precious publication of the proposed vesting order or 
scheme or modification. 

4. Mode of previous publication. 
(1) Unless the Central Government is of opinion that a proposed vesting order or proposed scheme or 

modification of a scheme may be made or settled without previous publication, it shall publish a draft of the 
proposed order, scheme or modification or a sufficient abstract thereof, for the information of persons likely 
to be affected thereby. 

(2) The publication shall be made in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Central Government 
may direct. 

(3) A notice specifying a date on or after which the proposed order, scheme or modification will be taken into 
consideration by the Central Government should be published with the draft or abstract. 

(4) The Central Government shall consider any objection or suggestion which it may receive from any person 
with respect to the proposed order, scheme or modification thereof before the date specified in the notice 
under sub-rule (3). 

5. Costs. The cost of the previous publication under Rule 4 of any proposed order, scheme or modification of a 
scheme, and any other costs incurred or which may be incurred in the making of the orders or in the settlement 
of a scheme or modification of a scheme, shall be paid by the applicant for the order, scheme or modification, 
as the case may be, and, if the Central Government so directs may be paid by him out of any money in his 
possession pertaining to the trust to which his application relates. 

6. Securities which may vest in the Treasurer.-No securities for money except the securities mentioned in 
Clauses (a), (b), (bb), (c) and (d) of Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (II of 1882), shall be vested in the 
Treasurer. 

7. Accounts of trusts consisting of immovable property.-In the case of property vested in the Treasurer other 
than securities for money, the person acting in the administration of the trust and having, under sub-section (3) 
of Section 8 of the Act, the possession, management and control of the property and the application of the 
income thereof, shall in books to be kept by him, regularly enter or cause to be entered full and true accounts 
of all moneys received and paid respectively on account of the trust, and shall, on the demand of the Central 
Government, submit annually to such public servant as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, in 
such form and at such time as the Central Government may prescribe, an abstract of those accounts and such 
returns as to other matters relating to the administration of the trust as the Central Government may from time 
to time see fit to require. 

8. Fees. 
(1) The following are prescribed as the fees to be paid to the Central Government in respect of any property 

vested under the Act in the Treasurer :- 
(i) In the case of property other than securities for money, the actual charge incurred by the Treasurer in 

the discharge of his functions in respect of the property. 

 111 



 

(ii) In the case of securities for money, at the rate of one Paisa for every rupee of interest collected. 
The fee shall be charged on interest by rounding off the amount to the nearest rupee, fractions of a 
rupee below fifty Paisa or more being reckoned as one rupee. 

(2) The Treasurer may deduct any fees payable to the Central Government under this rule on account of any 
endowment from any money in his hands on account of such endowment. If he holds no such moneys the 
amount shall be claimed form the administrators of the endowment. 

9. Vesting orders how filed. - All copies of vesting orders received by the Treasurer shall be filed together and 
shall be numbered in consecutive order of their receipt; when a sufficient number have been received they 
shall be bound in volumes. A note shall be made on each vesting order of any entries in the registers prescribed 
under these rules relating to the property vesting in the Treasurer under the order. 

10. Registers of securities. - On the receipt of any securities for money, or on their purchase by himself, the 
Treasurer shall record their receipt in a register in Form 1. He shall also keep a separate account for each 
endowment in Form 2, in which he shall record all receipts including any amount sent for investment, and all 
disbursements. In the cash account in Part - II of Form 2 the Treasurer shall record only his own transactions 
(such as the payment of the money to the administrator), and not the transactions of the administrators of the 
endowment fund. 

11. Stock Disposal Register. - The Treasurer shall enter all securities returned or sold by him in a register in Form 
3. Returns shall also be entered in Form 2, where the amount returned will be deducted from the capital of the 
endowment concerned. 

12. Custody of Securities. - On the issue of a vesting order under Section 4 of the Act in respect of any securities 
for money, the person authorized under Section 6 of the Act to make the application for such vesting order 
shall, as soon as practicable, forward to the Treasurer the said securities. The Treasurer shall, after recording 
the receipt of the said securities in the registers kept under Rule10, take steps, as soon as practicable, to have 
them converted into stock and keep the stock certificate in his custody. After conversion, entries shall be made 
in the Treasurer’s Stock Register in Form 7. A consolidated register showing the securities (e.g., Promissory 
Notes and the Stock Certificates) in the custody of the Treasurer shall also be maintained in Form 8. 

13. Accounting of Interest. - The Treasurer, on receipt of any interest securities, shall pass it through his General 
Trust Interest Account under a special Sub-Head “Interests on Charitable Endowments under Act VI of 1890”. 
The interest will then be distributed to the various ledger accounts in the register in Form 2, in which the gross 
amounts shall be shown, any deductions for fees, etc., being shown as a charge, and the payment of the 
balance to the administrators being shown as a disbursement. The Treasurer shall maintain personal, ledger 
account in the Reserve Bank and shall make payment to the administrators by cheques. The entries in the 
ledger of interest received shall be taken out and agreed annually with the total amount of the interest drawn. 

14. Balance Sheet. -The registers in Form 1 shall show all securities vested in the Treasurer as such. In order to 
prove the balance actually held by the Treasurer in his own hands, a balance sheet in Form 4 shall be made 
out actually and agreed with the actual securities in the Treasurer’s possession. Such agreement shall be 
certified on the balance sheet. 

15. Publication of accounts. -A list of all properties vested in the Treasurer and an abstract of the accounts of the 
interest and the annual agreement of balance shall be published in the Official Gazette on the 15th June of 
each year. 

16. Register of property other than securities.-The Treasurer shall enter in a register in Form 5 any property 
other than securities which becomes vested in him, and shall record in the same register against the original 
entry a note of any property of which he is divested. 

17. Form of publication of list and abstract.-The list of properties vested in the Treasurer to be published annually 
under Rule 15 shall be in Form 6. Part - I will relate to properties other than securities; Part - III will relate to 
securities and will also contain the abstract of accounts required by the Act to be published. The Treasurer 
shall demand and receive acknowledgements of the correctness of the balances when so published, from the 
administrators of endowment funds or from any one or more of their body who may have been authorized by 
the administrators to give such acknowledgements and such acknowledgements shall be furnished within 3 
months from the date of publication of accounts in the Official Gazette. 

18. Audit.-Arrangements for annual audit of the Treasurer’s accounts shall be made by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General. 

 112 



 

FORM 1 
 
 
 
 

REGISTER OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890 
 
 
 
 

   Particulars of Securities received   
   From No. and Nature of Distingui- Nominal Total   

SI. Date of Number or whom date of Securities, e.g. shing value of nominal Ledger Remarks 
No. Receipt brief received forwarding Government number of each value of Folio 

description of letter securities each security each 
Charitable 3 ½ per cent security separate 

Endowments Loan of 1865, endowment 
Guaranteed 

Railway 
Debentures, 

etc. 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 

           

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 113 



 

 

FORM 2 

LEDGER ACCOUNT OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890. 

 

1. Name of Endowment………… 
2. Particulars of vesting order………… 
3. When vested in Treasurer………… 
4. Name of Administrators………… 
5. To whom interest is to be sent………… 

 
PART – I Account of Capital 

 

Sl. Particulars Details of Value of each security    Amount Date to Initials of 
No. (e.g. securities (separate column for of half which Treasurer 
Form received or (distinguishing each kind) yearly interest or 
1 returned) number, etc.) 3 ½ per Guaranteed interest has Assitant-

cent Loan Railway been in-

of 1865 Deben- paid on Charge 
tures receipt  

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

NOTE.- The balance of the value columns must be worked out on every day on which there is a new entry. 

 114 



 

 
 

FORM 2 
 
 
 
 

PART-II-CASH ACCOUNT 
 
 
 

RECEIPTS     EXPENDITURE 
 

      
Date Particulars Amount Date Particulars Amount 

      

   

NOTE.  To be closed annually to balance. The transactions will not be numerous. A few pages of the ledger (rule 
only for the Cash Account) may be left for each account, so that the account may be carried on for several 
years without opening a fresh Ledger Account. 

 115 



 

 

FORM 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STOCK DISPOSAL REGISTER 
 
 

SI. Date of Name of the No. of entries in Amounts How GO’s Official 
No. entry Fund or Trust Stock Register disposed of disposed of initials Designation of 

Officer 

        

 116 



 

 

FORM 4 
 
 

BALANCE SHEET OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890 
 
 
 
 

 3 ½ per cent Loan (A pair of columns for each Total 
Particulars of 1865 different kind of security 

held) 
No. Value No. Value 

Opening Balance (from last year)      
...........Securities received.................. 
...........Stock Certificates received ..... 
.................... 
 

GRAND TOTAL 
 
Deduct - 
Sent to the PDO Reserve Bank of 
India for conversion into stock........... 

BALANCE 
Deduct - 
Returned or sold............................... 

BALANCE 
Add - 
Sent for conversion out of which stock 
certificates have not been received 

.............................. 
CLOSING BALANCE 

 
Certified that the above closing balance has been compared with the Securities in Treasurer’s possession and has 
been found to be agree both as to number and value. 

 117 



 

 

FORM 5 
 
 
 
 

REGISTER OF PROPERTIES OTHER THAN SECURITIES  
HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890 

 
 
 

 Particulars of vesting order   Property held 
SI. Name of Administrators of 
No. No. Date endowment property Description Value Annual 

income if 
known 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

        

 
 

 Title Deeds held   
Description Initials of Treasurer or  

Date of Where Date of To whom Authority for Assistant-in-Charge Remarks 
receipt deposited return returned return 

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 

        

 118 



 

FORM 6 
LIST AND ABSTRACT ACCOUNT OF  

PROPERTIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890 
 

PART - I - LIST OF PROPERTIES, OTHER THAN SECURITIES 
 
 
 
 

SI. Particulars of vesting Name of Administrators of Property held  
No. order endowment property Remarks 

No. Date Descri- Value Annual 
ption income 

if known 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

         

 
 
 
 

LISTOFABSTRACTPARTACCOUNT-II-OFSECURITIES 
 
 

Case Name of Persons Particular Total  Cash Receipts Cash Balance Remarks 
No. endow- in whose s of of expenditure in cash 

ment behalf Securities Securities Interest Other Total Payments* 
held or Cash cash 

dividend Receipts* Receipt
realised s 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

           

 

* Enter details in these columns 

 119 



 

FORM 7 
 
 
 
 

TREASURER’S STOCK REGISTER OF 
 
 

per cent loan of 
 

No. of Serial No. Date of To what fund To whom Amount of Amount of (Pair of Remarks 
Case in entry or trust the interest is investment half-yearly columns for 

Form No. investment to be interest noting interest 
belongs remitted payment order 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

     Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P.  

 120 



 

 

FORM 8 
 
 
 
 

REGISTER OF CLEAN GOVERNMENT PROMISSORY NOTES AND  
STOCK CERTIFICATES HELD BY THE TREASURER 

OF CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS FOR INDIA 
 
 

   Particulars A pair of   
SI. Date of In conversion Receipts Disposals columns for   
No. entry of noting interest  Remarks 

    
for half-year  

No. Amounts No. Amounts 
ending 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

         

 121 



 

 

APPENDIX - 9 
[ See Rule320] 

 
 

DESTRUCTION OF OFFICE RECORDS CONNECTED  
WITH ACCOUNTS 

 
 
 
 
The destruction of records (including correspondence) connected with accounts shall be governed by the following 
Rules and such other subsidiary rules consistent therewith as may be prescribed by Government in this behalf with 
the concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
1. The following shall on no account be destroyed :- 

(i) Records connected with expenditure, which is within the period of limitation fixed by law. 
(ii) Records connected with expenditure on projects, schemes or works not completed, although beyond the 

period of limitation. 
(iii) Records connected with claims to service and personal matters affecting persons in the service except as 

indicated in the Annexure to this Appendix. 
(iv) Orders and sanctions of a permanent character, until revised. 
(v) Records in respect of which an audit objection is outstanding. 

 
2. The following shall be preserved for not less than the period specified against them :- 

  Description of records   

 
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
     
1. Payments (I)Expenditure Sanctions not 2 years, or one year after  

and covered by Paragraph 1 completion of audit, whichever  
recoveries. above (including sanctions is later. Subject to: 

Relating to grants-in-aid) (a)Original nomination 
being placed in Vol. II 

  (ii)Cash Books maintained by 10years. of the Service Book of 
the Drawing and Disbursing Group ‘D’ Government 
Officers under Central servants;  
Government Account and 
(Receipts and (b)Nomination in 
Payments)Rules,1983. original or an 

  (iii)Contingent expenditure. 3 years, or one year after authenticated copy 
completion of audit, thereof being placed 
Whichever is later. in Vol. II of the Service 

Book/Personal File in 
  (iv)Arrear claims (including 3 years, or 1 year after 

case of other 
sanction for investigation, completion of audit, 

Government servants. 
Where necessary). Whichever is later. 

Subject to an 
  Papers relating to:  authenticated copy of 
  (v)GPF Membership. 1year. the sanction being 

  (vi)GPF Nomination. 1year-afterfinal placed on the 

Settlement of GPF Account. personal file. 

  (vii)Adjustment of missing credits 1year. 
in GPF Accounts. 

 122 



 

  Description of records   

 
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
  (viii) Final withdrawal from 1 year.  

GPF, e.g., for house 
building, higher technical 
education of children, etc. 

  (ix) GPF annual 1 year.  
statements. 

  (x)T.A./Transfer T.A. 3 years, or one year after  
claims completion of audit, 

whichever is later. 

2. Budget  3 years. The retention period 
 Estimates /  here related to the 
 Revised  Budget / Revised 
 Estimates.  Estimates as 
3. Service  compiled by the 

Books of: 3 years after issue of final Budget / Accounts 
(a) Officials pension/ gratuity payment Section for the 
entitled to order. Department as a 
retirement / whole. 
terminal 
benefits. 

 (b) Other  3 years after they have  
employees. ceased to be in service. 

4. Leave of:   
Account 

 (a) Officials  3 years after issue of final  
entitled to pension/ 
retirement / gratuity payment order. 
terminal 
benefits. 

 (b) Other  3 years after they have  
employees. ceased to be in service. 

5. Service (a) Nomination relating to 1 year - after settlement of Subject to the 
records family pension in and DCR benefits. nomination in 

gratuity.  original or an 
(b) Civil List Gradation/  authenticated copy 
Seniority list- 3 years. thereof (where 
(i) in the case of  original kept with the 
Departments preparing . audit)as the may be 
bringing out the being placed in Vol. 
compilation. II of the Service 

Book/ Personal File. 
  (ii) In the case of other 1 year after issue of  

Departments (i.e., those relevant compilation. 
supplying information for 
such compilation) 

 123 



 

  Description of records   

 

Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
  (c)Alteration in the date of 3years. Subject to suitable entry 

birth. being made in 
the appropriate service 
record and an 
authenticated copy of the 
order being kept in 
Vol. II of Service 
Book/Personal file 

  (d) Admission of previous 3years;or1yearafter – do – 
  Service not supported by Completion of  
  Authenticated service Audit, whichever is later  
  record, e.g., through  Subject to a suitable record 

collateral evidence.  being kept somewhere, 

(e)Verification of service. 5years. e.g., in the Service Book or 
History Sheet. 

6. Expenditure (a)  In respect of lower To be weeded out at the  

 statements. formations. end of financial year.  

  (b)In respect of To be weeded out after the  
  Department itself. Appropriation Accounts for  

   the year have been finalized  

  (c)Register of monthly To be weeded out  

  expenditure(Form GFR9) the Appropriation  

   Accounts for the year have  

   Been finalized.  

7. Surety Bonds  3yearsafter the Bond  
 executed in  Ceases to enforceable.  

 be favour of a    

 temporary or a    

 retiring Govern-    

 ment servant.    

8. (a) Pay Bill . 35 years  

register 
 (b) Office copies  35 years  

 of Establishment    
 pay bills and    

 related schedules    

 (in respect of    

 period for which    

 pay bill register is    

 not maintained).    

 (c) Schedules to  3 years, or one year after  
 the Establishment  the completion of audit,  

 pay bills for the  whichever is later  

 period for which    

 pay bill register is    

 maintained.    

 (d) Acquaintance  3 years, or one year after  
 Roll.  the completion of audit,  

   whichever is later.  

 124 



 

 
  Description of records   

 

Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

9. Muster Rolls.  Such period as may be  
prescribed in this behalf in 
the departmental regulations 
subject to a minimum of three 
financial years of payment 

   
excluding the financial year of 

  payment 
10. Bill Register 5 years. 

 
 Maintained in 5 years  
 FormTR-28-A   

11. Paid cheques  The counter foils of 
 Returned by the  paid cheques 
 BanktotheAudit/  should be preserved 

 Accounts Office.  for the same period as 
 prescribed for 

   preservation of paid 
   cheques, viz., 5 years. 
   However, in cases 
   where the counter foils 
  

 are required to be 
  

 preserved in 
  

 connection with 
  

 settlement of some 
  

5 years after the contract/ enquiry, etc., these 
12. Files, papers and agreement is fulfilled or should not be 
 Documents terminated. In cases where destroyed unless 
 Relating to audit objections have been otherwise advised by 

 contracts, raised, however, the relevant the authorities 
agreements, etc. files and documents shall not, conducting the enquiry. 

under any circumstances, be The other 
instructions contained 

allowed to be destroyed till 
  in this Appendix will 

such time as the objections 
  continue to be 
  have been cleared to the 

applicable in this case 
  satisfaction of the audit 

before the counterfoils 
  authorities or have been 

which are more than 
  reviewed by the Public 

five years old are 
Accounts Committee. 

  actually destroyed. 
3 years after the expiry of the 

13. Sub-vouchers financial year in which the  
expenditure was incurred, 

 Relating to the subject to completion of  

 Secret Service administrative audit and issue  

 Expenditure. of audit certificate by the  
nominated Controlling Officer. 

 125 



 

INSTRUCTIONS 
1. The retention period specified in Column (4), in the case of a file, is to be reckoned form the year in which the 

file is closed (i.e., action thereon has been completed) and not necessarily from the year in which it is recorded. 
2. In the case of records other than files, e.g., registers, the prescribed retention period will be counted from the 

year in which it has ceased to be current. 
3. In exceptional cases, a record may be retained for a period longer than that specified in the schedule, if it has 

certain special features or such a course is warranted by the peculiar needs of the department. In no case, 
however, will a record be retained for a period shorter than that prescribed in the schedule. 

4. If a record is required in connection with the disposal of another record, the former will not be weeded out until 
after all the issues raised in the latter have been finally decided, even though the retention period marked on 
the former may have expired in the meantime. In fact, the retention periods initially marked on such records 
should be consciously reviewed and, where necessary, revised suitably. 

 
 
NOTES.- 
(1) Before any pay bills/pay registers are destroyed, the service of the Government servants concerned should 

be verified under Rule257in accordance(1) with . 
(2) The periods of preservation of account records in Public Works Offices are prescribed separately by 

Government. 
(3) Where a minimum period after which any record may be destroyed has been prescribed, the Head of a 

Department or any other authority empowered by him to do so, may order in writing the destruction of such 
record in their own and subordinate offices on the expiry of that period counting from the last day of the latest 
financial year covered by the record. 

(4) Heads of Departments shall be competent to sanction the destruction of such other records in their own and 
subordinate offices as may be considered useless, but a list of such records as property appertain to the 
accounts audited by the Indian Audit and Accounts Departments shall be forwarded to the Audit Officer and 
or the Accounts Officers, as the case may be, for his concurrence in their destruction before the destruction is 
ordered by the Head of Department. 

(5) Full details shall be maintained permanently, in each office, of all records destroyed from time to time. 

 126 



 

 

ANNEXURETOAPPENDIX–9 
 

Destruction of records referred to in Para. 1(iii)of this Appendix 
 
 

Description of records   

Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

1. Creation & (I) Continuance / revival of 1 year Subject to particulars 
Classification of posts. of sanction being noted in 
posts. Establishment/ Sanction 

Register. 

  (ii) Conversion of 10 years – do – 
temporary posts. 

  (iii) Creation of posts. 10 years – do – 

  (iv) Revision of scales of Permanent in the case of – do – 
pay. Departments issuing 

orders and 
Departments concerned; 
other Departments 
need keep only the 
standing orders, weeding 
out superseded ones as 
and when 
they become obsolete. 

  (v) Upgrading of posts. 10 years – do – 

     
2. Review for Establishment / Permanent. Where, for any reason the 
 determining Sanction Register.  register is 
 suitability of   re-written, the old volume 
 employees for   will be kept for 3 years. 

 continuance in   
 service.   

   3 years Subject to: 
3. Arbitration and  (a) the file not being 

litigation cases. closed until the award/ 
judgment become final in 
all respects by limitation 
or final decision in appeal/ 
revision; and 

   (b) cases involving 
important issues or 
containing material of a 
high precedent / 
reference value being 
retained for an 
appropriately longer 
period either initially or at 
the time of review. 

 127 



 

 

 
Description of Records   

Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

4. Notices under  1year If such a notice is 
Section 80 of  followed up by a civil suit, 
Civil Procedure  it would become 
Code. arbitration/ litigation case 

and would, therefore, 
need to be retained for 3 
years. 

     
5. Recruitment. Condonation of break in 5years Subject to a suitable 
  service.  entry being made in the 
   appropriate service 
   record and an 
   authenticated copy of 
   the order being kept in 
   Vol. II of Service Book 
   Personal File. 
     
6. Advance. 
 housebuilding    

  (i) Car Advance Rules   

(ii) Conveyance   

Advance Rules.   

(iii)  
 Cycle Advance Rules  

(iv) Festival Advance Permanent in the case  

Rules of Departments issuing  

(v) GPF Advance Rules the rules, orders and  

instructions; other  
(vi) House Building 

Departments need keep  
Advance Rules 

only the standing rules,  
(vii) Motor Cycle/ etc., weeding out the  

Scooter Advance superseded ones as  
Rules and when they become  

(viii) Pay Advance Rules obsolete.  

(ix) T. A. Advance Rules  

(x) Travel Concession  

Rules  
 

(xi) Other Advance Rules 
 

(xii) Grant of car   
Advance   

      (xiii)Grant of  Subject to : 
conveyance  (i) suitable entries being 
allowance 1year made in pay bill register; 

and (ii) in case of motor 
car/motor cycle / scooter 
and house building 
advances. 

 128 



 

 
 

 
  

Description Of records 
Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

    (a)copies of sanction 
xiv  Grant of cycle 

advance 1 year Being placed on 
      xv   Grant of festival  Personal files; and 

advance  (b)mortgage deeds and 
xvi  Grant of GPF  Other agreements 

advance  Executed being kept 
xvii Grant of motor  Separately in safe 

cycle/scooter  Custody for the period 
advance  They are valid. 

xviii Grant of pay 
advance 1 year  

xix  Grant of T. A. 
advance 

xx   Grant of LTC 
advance 

xxi  Grant of other 
advance 

7. Surety Bonds  3yearsafter the Bond  

 executed in favor Ceases to be 
 of a temporary enforceable. 
 or a retiring  
 Government  
 servant.  

     
8. Pension / (i) Rules and Orders Permanent in the case of 
 retirement. (general aspects.) Departments issuing the 

rules, orders and 
  (ii) In respect of Groups instructions; other 

Departments need keep only 
  ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ the standing rules and 
  Government servants. orders weeding out the 

 superseded ones as and 
 (a) Pre-verification of 

when they become obsolete. 
  pension cases. 3years 

  (b) Invalid pension  
Till one year after the 

  (c) Family pension last beneficiary of the 
  (d) Other pensions family pension ceases to 

been titled to receive or 

   5 years whichever is 

(e) Gratuity later. 
5years 

  (f) Commutation of 15years 
  pension after the Bond 
  ceases to be enforceable. 

 129 



 

 
Note – The principle to be adopted in respect of files having financial implications and hence liable to be called by 
audit for inspection is that such files should be retained for a period of five years after they have been recorded. If, 
at any time during the period of five years, an audit objection having reference to the transaction dealt with in that 
file arises, is received, the file will not be destroyed until after the audit objection has been settled to the satisfaction 
of the audit. Also, if local audit does not take place within the period of five years, the Head of the Office should 
ascertain from the audit authorities whether they have any objection to the files relating to the earlier years, due for 
weeding out by the application of the five year formula, being destroyed or retained for a further period for scrutiny 
by the audit party and, if so, for what period. 
While records may be reviewed and weeded out at periodical intervals in the light of the retention periods prescribed 
to avoid their build-up, the attempt should be to make a continuous and conscious effort throughout the year to 
weed out unnecessary records. In other words, the working rules should be “weed as you go”. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
1. The retention period specified in Column (4) in the case of a file, is to be reckoned from the year in which 

the file is closed (i.e., action thereon has been completed) and not necessarily from the year in which it is 
recorded. 

2. In the case of records other than files, e.g., registers, the prescribed retention period will be counted from 
the year in which it has ceased to be current. 

3. In exceptional cases, a record may be retained for a period longer than that specified in the Schedule, if it 
has certain special features or such a course is warranted by the peculiar needs of the Department. In no 
case, however, will a record be retained for a period shorter than that prescribed in the schedule. 

4. If a record is required in connection with the disposal of another record, the former will not be weeded out 
until after all the issues raised on the latter have been finally decided, even though the retention period 
marked on the former may have expired in the meantime. In fact, the retention periods initially marked on 
such records should be consciously “reviewed and where necessary revised suitably”. 

 130 



 

 

APPENDIX - 10 
[See Rule 61 and Rule 69] 

 
 

“CHECK AGAINST PROVISION OF FUNDS” 
 
 
 
 
The pre-check to be applied to all payments by the departmentalized Accounts Officers includes a check against 
provision of funds also. It is an important part of the functions of the Accounts Office to see that no payment is made 
in excess of the budget allotment. In order to exercise an effective check in this behalf, a separate register (DDO- 
wise Bill Passing-cum-Expenditure Control Register –Form CAM –9) should be maintained in the Accounts Officer 
for each Drawing Officer and by sub-heads and units of appropriation so as to ensure at the time of passing each 
bill that the amount of the bill under check is covered by Budget allotment. If the amount of any bill leads to excess 
over the Budget allotment or is not covered by an advance from the Contingency Fund, the Accounts Officer should 
decline payment under advice to the authority controlling the grant so that the latter could arrange for additional 
funds. An Appropriation Audit Register (Form CAM – 62) shall be maintained. 
 
NOTE. – In cases where payment of a bill/claim would lead to excess over the provision under any unit of 
appropriation the payment may be made by the Pay and Accounts Office only on receipt of an assurance in writing 
from the Ministry/Head of Department controlling the grant that the expenditure involved is not on a New Service, 
or New Instrument of Service; that necessary funds to accommodate the expenditure will be provided for in time by 
issue of re- appropriation order, etc., that a note to the effect has been kept for further action, and that the grant as 
a whole (i.e., separately under Revenue and Capital Sections) is not likely to be exceeded. This applies in respect 
of any new item of expenditure, provision for which does not exist in the Budget (as distinct from expenditure on 
“New Service” or “New Instrument Service” not provided in the Budget) as well as in cases where the existing 
provisions is not sufficient to cover the payments. In case of an urgent requirement of expenditure attracting 
the provisions of New Service/New Instruments of Service and thereby supplementary demands through 
theapproval of Parliament, the same should be referred to Ministry of Finance. The excess expenditure in 
such cases can be allowed by the concerned Financial Advisers only on the specific approval of Secretary 
(Expenditure) that the necessary funds will be made available through the next batch of supplementary 
demands for grant. 
If such a contingency in regard to inevitable payment of a bill should arise towards the close of financial year and 
the grant as a whole is likely to get exceeded thereby, order of the FA on behalf of the Chief Accounting Authority 
would have to be sought. 
In case the additional funds required are to be made available merely by reallocation (and not by re- appropriation) 
of savings, if any, under the same sub-head of appropriation, the related claim will be passed for payment only after 
additional funds therefor are allocated in writing by the Controlling Officer. 

 131 



 

APPENDIX - 11 
[ See Rule 225 (viii) (b) ] 

 
 

FORMULA FOR PRICE VARIATION CLAUSE 
 
 
 
 
The formula for Price Variation should ordinarily include a fixed element, a material element and a labour element. 
The figures representing the material element and the labour element should reflect the corresponding proportion 
of input costs, while the fixed element may range from 10 to 25%. That portion of the price represented by the fixed 
element will not be subject to variation. The portions of the price represented by the material element and labour 
element alone will attract Price variation. The formula for Price variation will thus be : 
 
 
  
 
P1 =P0FF +a  + b- P0 M0 
  
 
Where P1 is the adjustment amount payable to the supplier (a minus figure will indicate a reduction in the Contract 
Price) 
P0 is the Contract Price at the base level. 
F is the Fixed element not subject to Price variation. 
a is the assigned percentage to the material element in the Contract price.  
b is the assigned percentage to the labour element in the Contract Price. 
L0 and L1 are the wage indices at the base month and year and at the month and year of calculation respectively. 
M0 and M1 are the material indices at the base month and year and at the month and year of calculation 
respectively. 
If more than one major item of material is involved, the material element can be broken up into two or three 
components such as Mx, My &Mz. Where price variation clause has to be provided for services (with insignificant 
inputs of materials) as for example in getting Technical assistance normally paid in the form of per diem rates, the 
price variation formula should have only two elements viz. a high fixed element and a labour element. The fixed 
element can in such cases be 50% or more, depending on the mark-up by the supplier of the Periderm rate vis-à-
vis the wage rates. 

 132 



 

 

APPENDIX - 12 
[See Rule 279 (1).] 

 
 

RATES OF GUARANTEE FEE 
 
 
 
 
Guarantee fees based on credit score and tenor for Domestic as well as external borrowings 
 

 Less than or equal to 5 years More than 5 years 
Category A 0.5 0.6 
Category B 0.7 0.9 

 
Suggested Framework for Risk assessment of Guarantee proposals 
 

Ministries/Departments are required to undertake risk assessment of the proposals received from CPSUs 
before sending them to Ministry of Finance. Following ratios may be calculated for assessing the risk: 
 
i) Debt Service Coverage Ratio: It indicates the ability of a company to use its operating income to repay 
all its debt obligations, including repayment of principal and interest on both short-term and long-term debt. 
 

Earnings before Interest, Tax, Depreciation & Amortization(EBITDA) 
Interest + Principal 

 
Category A Category B 
More than or equal to 1.25 Less than 1.25  

 
 
 
ii) Current Ratio (CR): It depicts the ability to meet short-term liabilities from selling short-term assets, and 
calculated as under:  

 
Current assets 

Current liabilities 
 

Category A Category B 
More than or equal to 1.5 Less than 1.5  

 
 
 
iii) Debt to Equity Ratio (D/E): It depicts the ability to pay off debt in future and calculated as under: 

 
Total liabilities 

Shareholders’ equity 
 

Category A Category B 
Less than or equal to 1 More than 1  

 
 
 

Overall Risk Rating Less than or equal to 1.5 More than 1.5 
Category A Category B 

 
 
 
 

 133 



 

Example: The above framework has been illustrated as under:  
 

 DSCR* D/E* CR* Calculation= Overall risk 
Average of rating 
(Ratings 
Assigned) 

Company 1 1.75 0.25 2.10 = 1 (1+1+1)/3)  Category A 
Company 2 1.20 1.20 1.50 = 1.67(2+2+1)/3)  Category B 
Company 3 0.90 1.80 0.80  = 2 (2+2+2)/3) Category B  

 
Note: Overall Risk Rating shall be calculated by taking simple mean of all the ratios by assigning 1 and 2 values to 
‘A or ‘B’ category.  
 
*Three years’ average ratio may be considered for calculating the overall risk rating. 
 
 

**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[Updated vide DoE’s OM No.8(18)/2021/E.II.A dated 20.07.2022 in view of DEA OM F.No.12(13)-B(SD)/2020-Parl dated 10.06.2022] 

 134 



 

FORM GFR 1 
[ Rule 65 (4) ) ] 

 
 

APPLICATION FOR AN ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATION, 
YEAR……………………………… FOR DEPARTMENT 

 
 
 

Budget Head Original Expenditure Additional Expenditure during the past three 
Major and Appropriation  appropriation 

Amount Necessary 
Minor Heads  as years  applied for 

up for 
of Account  modified 20 20 20 20 

to the remaining 
and Primary by competent 

month month 
unit of authority 

Appropriation 

Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 

         

 
No…………………………………., dated…………………………… 20. 
Explanation of insufficiency of grant, recommendations and proposals for re-appropriation by - 
(1) Disbursing Officer : 
(2) Controlling Officer : 
(3) Head of Department : 
(4) Secretary to Government in Administrative Department. No…………………………………. , dated 
……………………………… 20. 
 
Order of sanction with details 
Additional appropriation of Rs………………………………………………… of source of appropriation Sanctioned. 
The amount will be met by re-appropriation form ……………………………………………………….............…… 
 

Signature ………………………………………………. 
Designation ……………………………………………. 

 135 



 

GFR2 

FORM GFR 2 
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ] 

 
REVENUE RECEIPTS 

 
Ministry / Department / Union Territory : 
Major Head : 

(In thousands of Rupees) 
 

 First Month Last Month  
ACCOUNTS Total 
Third  Eight Seven Five Four 
Last year      
 
Second  
Last year 
 
Last year 

 
Current Budget 
Year Revised 
 
Ensuing Budget 
Year 

 

 
Accounts 7 months  Accounts Current year Ensuing 

Minor Heads Year 

Last year Current year Third  Second Last  Budget Revised Budget 
Last Year Last Year Year Estimate Estimate Estimate 

         

 

Explanation for increase / decrease (Minor Headwise) 
 
Signature  …………………...................................... 
Designation  ………………...............................…… 
Date ………………………...............................…… 

 136 



 

 

FORM GFR 2-A 
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ] 

 
 

ESTIMATES OF FOREIGN GRANTS CONCERNING 
THE MINISTRY / DEPARTMENT ……......................................... 

 
(In thousands of Rupees) 

 Date of aid   Receipt Amounts to be provided in  
Name of the agreement Particulars of Total Major Current Current Ensuring Manner of 

grant or assistance to assistance Head Year BE Year RE Year BE utilization 
country/ body be received expected of aid* 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

         

 
 

Signature ……………………………. 
Designation …………………………. 
Date .…………………………………. 

 
* A brief note may be added indicating the project on which aid is to be utilized. In the case of material and 
equipment, the relevant grant and expenditure Heads of Account under which (i) utilization of material by Central 
Government Departments / Projects, (ii) transfer of material to States, Union Territories and other Bodies will be 
adjusted and also whether the utilization on transfer will be on Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes should also be indicated. In cases where the aid material is proposed to be sold the Receipt Major Head 
under which the proceeds will be credited should be indicated. 
 
NOTE : Cash grants and assistance in the form of material and equipment should be indicated separately in 
Columns 3 to 8. 

 137 



 

 
 

FORM GFR 2 - B 
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ] 

 
 

ESTIMATES OF INTEREST RECEIPTS AND LOAN REPAYMENTS 
 

Ministry / Department ………….................……………………. 
(In thousands of Rupees) 

 Interest Receipts Loan Repayments 

BE RE BE BE RE BE 
Current Current Ensuing Current Current Current 

Year Year Year Year Year Year 

       

1. State Governments*. 
2. Union Territory Governments*. 
3. Interest on Capital Outlay in 

departmental commercial 
undertakings. 

4. Foreign Governments*. 
5. Industrial/Commercial/Financial 

undertakings 
(undertaking-wise details to be given) 
: 

(a) Public Sector Undertakings.  
(b) Private Sector Undertakings. 

6. Statutory Bodies (Port Trusts, 
Municipalities, KVIC, Tea/Coffee 
Boards, etc.) 

7. Railways / P&T Reserve Funds. 
8. Other parties (Co-operatives, 

Educational Institutions, displaced 
persons and other individual loanees 
except Governments servants)* 

9. Government servants. 
 
 
 
 
Total 

      

 

* Estimates for each State / Union Territory / Foreign Government /Statutory Body or Institution should be separately 
appended to the Annexure. 

No........................................................................................ 
Ministry / Department ………......………………..........…..… 
Date the ………....……………………………….........…….... 

 
Forwarded in duplicate to the Ministry of Finance, Budget Division. 
 

Signature ….……………...…………............…...........….….. 
Designation………………………………....……...........….… 

 138 



 

 

FORM GFR 3 
[ See Rule 58 and Rule 64(1)) ] 

 
Office of ………………………… 
Grant No ……………………… 

 
LIABILITY REGISTER FOR THE YEAR …………… 

 
 

SI. Designation Month Serial Nature No. & date Agency Estimated Permissible Total 
No. of Disbursing of number in of of indent or on which Cost excess over Liability 

Officer Report Liability Liability connected indent is the (Cols. 8+9) 
Statement letter placed estimated 

cost, in any 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

          

 139 



 

 
 

Probable month and year  Record of Payment Balance commitments   
in which the expenditure  [Col. 10 minus Col. 14(b)]   
will be accounted for in  Initials   

the departmental of the (a)  (b)  (a)  (b)*  Initials of  
expenditure statement Branch Month  Amount Amount Year(s) in the Remarks 

Officer and which it is Branch 
Month  Amount of year likely to be Officer 
and  expenditure  discharged 
year to be incurred 

11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 

         

 

NOTE :- Cols. 2, 3 and 4 will be operated upon only in the Register of Liabilities maintained by the Controlling 
Officers in respect of the case reported by their Disbursing Officers. 
 
* If the balance of commitment is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year-wise break-
up of the amount should be indicated. 

 140 



 

 

FORM GFR 3-A 
[See Rule58] 

 
Office of ………………………… 
Grant No ……………………… 
 

LIABILITY STATEMENT FOR THE MONTH OF ………………………….. 
 

Part - I - Statement of Liabilities incurred during the month of report 
 
 

SI. Nature of No. and Agency on Estimated Permissible Total Probable month in  
No. liability date which cost excess over liability which the expenditure Remarks 

of indent indent is the (Col. 5 + will be accounted for 
or placed or estimated Col. 6) in the departmental 

connected demand is cost, if any expenditure statement 
letter made Month Expenditur

e likely to 
be incurred 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

          

 141 



 

 

 
Part - II - Payments made against Liabilities and Liabilities  

cancelled or finally paid off 
 
 
 

  Record of payment Balance commitment Remarks 
Month in  Serial  

(a) (b) (a) (b)* 
which  No. 

Liability was Month  Amount Amount Year(s) in which 
reported and year the balance of 

Commitments  
is likely to be 
discharged. 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

       

 
NOTE 1-In Col. 2, the number to be entered will be the serial number of the liability in the Liability Statement in     

which it was first reported. 
NOTE 2 -   In the Remarks column, the following information should also be given :- 

(i) If payment against a liability is likely to be made, not in the month originally indicated, but in some 
other month, the latter should be indicated. If change in the month of payment is the only 
information to be given in respect of a liability, the Columns to be used will be 1, 2 and 5. 

(ii) Similarly, if the whole or part of a liability has been cancelled or otherwise extinguished, the fact 
may be mentioned and brief reasons given. 

 
* If the balance of commitments is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year -wise break- up 
of the amount should be indicated. 

 142 



 

 

Part - III - Progressive amount of outstanding 
 
 
 

 
Month in  Serial  Balance commitments 

which  No. (a) (b)* 
liability was  Amount Year(s) in which the balance of 

reported commitments is likely to be discharged 

1 2 3 4 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total 

 
NOTE. 1 - This is a list of liabilities which are pending, that is, those which have not been paid off or otherwise 

extinguished or cancelled. 
NOTE. 2 - In Column 2, the number to be entered will be the serial number of the liability in the Liability 

Statement in which it was first reported. 
 
* If the balance of commitments is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year -wise break- up 
of the amount should be indicated. 

 142 



 

 

FORM GFR 4 
[ See Paragraph 9 of Appendix - 3 ] 

 
 

STATEMENT OF PROPOSALS FOR PRE-BUDGET DISCUSSION 
 
 

Demand No. 
STATEMENT OF BUDGET ESTIMATES      (in crores of Rupees) 

Sl. Description as Actuals        Actuals B.E. Actuals upto R.E. B.E 
No. shown in the For the last two current September of current current year 

Exp.Bud.Vol.2 Preceding years year current year year 
(SBE) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

 

 
 

APPENDIX I     Expenditure SBE 
(See Paragraph3.5) 

 
Ministry/ Department          Demand No. 

(Rs.in crore) 
 

 Actuals BE RE BE 
    
For the last two (current year) (current year) (next year) 
Preceding years 

 Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
A CENTRE'S EXPENDITURE         

I. Establishment Expenditure         

II. Central Sector Schemes         

III. Other Central Expenditure         

         
B. TRANSFERS TO STATES 

IV. Centrally Sponsored Schemes         

V. Finance Commission Transfers         

VI. Other Transfers to States         

 143 



 

 

FORM GFR 4 
[ See Paragraph 3.5 ] 

OBJECT HEAD WISE SUMMARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PART C-OBJECT HEADWISE SUMMARY 
 

Demand No.  
(Rs.in crore) 

 

Object Object Actual BE Actual RE BE 

Head Head 2015-16  Expenditure   
Code Name   till   

    September   

   Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital  

          

          

          

          

          

          

          

 144 



 

 

FORM GFR 5 
[ See Rule 57 (4) (ii) and Rule 57 (5) (iii)] 

 
 

REGISTER SHOWING EXPENSES BY HEADS OF ACCOUNT 
 
 
 
Office of .................................................   Head of Account.................................... 

Major Head................................................. 
Minor Head................................................ 

Sub-Head ................................................... 
Month 
Year           (Unit of Appropriation) 
 

 Allotment Sub-Head of Grants Deduction, if Net amount 
any of 

SI. No. Voucher No./Token No. & Date/Serial      the bill 
No. in Bill Register* 

1.         
2. 
3. 
4. 

Add adjustment communicated by PAO        
Total for the month 

Total from 1st April Balance of the        
appropriation 

 
NOTE 1. If an allotment is changed, necessary correction in the register should be made in red ink.  
NOTE 2. Allotment of expenditure under ‘Charged’ portion should be indicated distinctly. 
NOTE 3.- This account should be dispatched on the 3rdof the following month. 
 

* Serial No. in Bill Register to be entered only in respect of bills passed by Cheque Drawing DDOs 
under their cheque-drawing powers. 

 
 
 

Signature..................................................... 
Designation................................................. 
Date............................................................ 

 145 



 

 

FORM GFR 6 
[ See Rule 57 (4) (iv) ] 

 
 

BROADSHEET FOR WATCHING RECEIPT OF  
ACCOUNT FROM DISBURSING OFFICERS 

 
 

Office of ................................................................... 
Major  Head............................................................. 
Minor Head ............................................................. 
Sub-Head ................................................................ 

 
Serial Names of Disbursing District Date of receipt of account 
No. Officers 

March April May 
      

 

NOTE 1.Districts are to be arranged according to alphabetical order. 
NOTE 2.Dates of receipts should be noted in monthly columns. Reminder should be sent if not received by the 

7thof the month. 

 146 



 

 

FORM GFR 7 
[ See Rule 57 (4) (vi) ] 

 
 

COMPILATION SHEET 
 
 
 

Major Head.................................................... 
Minor Head.................................................... 
Sub-Head....................................................... 

 
 

Month Serial No. of the Disbursing Officers      Total for Remarks 
each officer 

         
Total expenditure .............................. 
Add Adjustment communicated by 
Accounts Officer and not reckoned by 
DDOs .............................................. 
...................................................... 
Grand Total....................................... 
 
Add Total up to previous month........... 
…………………................................ 
Progressive Total up-to-date ............... 
........................................................ 

 147 



 

 

FORM GFR 8 
[ See Rule 57 (4) (viii), (5) (iv) & (6)] 

 
 

CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS 
 
 
 
Name of Office........................................................ Grant  No................................................................. 

Appropriation.......................................................... 
Financial Year........................................................... 

 
Units of Grants  Grants  Proportionate Grant Actual  

appropriation sanctioned distributed from April to date Expenditure April 
(Part -III of Demands 

for Grants) 
1 2 3 4 5 

(i) Salaries Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted 
(ii) Total of all units 
of appropriation         

 
Units of Actual Expenditure 

appropriation 
May Progressive June Progressive 

(Part -III of Demands 
expenditure expenditure 

for Grants) 
upto end of May 

 6 7 8 9 
(i) Salaries Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted 

 (ii) Total of all units 
of appropriation         

 

NOTE 1. Subsequent charges, if any, under Column 2 are to be made in red ink. 
NOTE 2. Figures under Column 4 may be entered in pencil for facility of updating from month to month. 
NOTE 3.Wherever variations between actual expenditure and proportion grant are large, suitable explanations 

should be given in a “Remarks” column. 
 

 148 



 

 

FORM GFR 9 
[ See Rule 57 (8) ] 

 
 

BROADSHEET FOR WATCHING RECEIPT OF THE RETURNS FROM THE HEADS OF 
DEPARTMENTS UNDER A DEPARTMENT OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 

 
 
 

SI. Grant Date of receipt of returns 
No. No. 

April May June July August Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. March 

              

 

NOTE 1.Dates of receipt should be noted in monthly columns. Reminders should be sent if returns are not received 
by the prescribed date. 

 
NOTE 2.Returns relating to the Secretariat proper should also be maintained in the above form. 

 149 



 

 

FORM GFR 10 
[ See Rule 217 (iii) ] 

 
 

REPORT OF SURPLUS, OBSOLETE AND  
UNSERVICEABLE STORES FOR DISPOSAL 

 
 
 

Item No. Particulars of Quantity/ Book Value/ Condition and Mode of disposal Remarks 
stores Weight Original year of purchase (sale, public 

purchase price auction or 
otherwise) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

       

 
Signature........................................................... 
Designation....................................................... 
Date.................................................................. 

 150 



 

 

FORM GFR 11 
[ See Rule 222] 

 
 

SALE ACCOUNT 
 
 
 
 

Item Particulars Quantity/ Name Highest Highest Earnest Date on Whether the Auctioneer’s 

No. of Weight And bid bid money Which the Articles were Commission 
 Stores  Full accepted rejected realized complete actually and 
   address   on Amount is Handed over acknowled- 
   Of   The spot realized On the spot.    gement 
   purchaser    and If not,the For 
       credited Actual date Its 
       into Of handing Payment 
       treasury Over of the  

        Articles with  

        quantities  

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

          

 
 

Signature........................................................... 
Designation....................................................... 
Date.................................................................. 

 

 151 



 

 
 

GFR 12 – A 
[(See Rule 238 (1)] 

 
 

FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE 
FOR AUTONOMOUS BODIES OR THE GRANTEE ORGANIZATION 

 
 

UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE FOR THE YEAR………….. in respect 
of recurring/non-recurring 

GRANTS-IN-AID/SALARIES/CREATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS 
 
1.Name of the Scheme...................................................................................... 
2. Whether recurring or non-recurring grants....................................................... 
3. Grants position at the beginning of the Financial year 
   (i)  Cash in Hand/Bank 
    (ii)  Unadjusted advances 
    (iii) Total 
4. Details of grants received, expenditure incurred and closing balances: (Actuals) 
 

Unspent Interest Interest Grant received during the Total Expenditure Closing 
Balances of Earned deposited year Available incurred Balances 

Grants received thereon back to the funds (5-6) 
years [figure as Govern- (1+2- 

at Sl. No. ment 3+4) 
3 (iii)] 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

   Sanction Date Amount    
No.  (ii) (iii) 
(i) 

         

 
Component wise utilization of grants: 
 

Grant-in-aid– Grant-in-aid– Salary Grant-in-aid–creation of capital Total 
General assets 

    

    

 
Details of grants position at the end of the year 
  (i)   Cash in Hand/Bank 
  (ii)  Unadjusted Advances 
  (iii) Total 

 152 



 

 
 

Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which grants were sanctioned have been duly fulfilled/are 
being fulfilled and that I have exercised following checks to see that the money has been actually utilized for the 
purpose for which it was sanctioned: 
(i)  The main accounts and other subsidiary accounts and registers (including assets registers) are maintained 

asprescribed in the relevant Act/Rules/Standing instructions (mention the Act/Rules) and have been duly 
audited by designated auditors. The figures depicted above tally with the audited figures mentioned in financial 
statements/accounts. 

(ii)  There exist internal controls for safeguarding public funds/assets, watching outcomes and achievements of 
physical targets against the financial inputs, ensuring quality in asset creation etc. & the periodic evaluation of 
internal controls is exercised to ensure their effectiveness. 

(iii)  To the best of our knowledge and belief, no transactions have been entered that are in violation of relevant 
Act/Rules/standing instructions and scheme guidelines. 

(iv)  The responsibilities among the key functionaries for execution of the scheme have been assigned in clear 
terms and are not general in nature. 

(v)  The benefits were extended to the intended beneficiaries and only such areas/districts were covered where the 
scheme was intended to operate. 

(vi) The expenditure on various components of the scheme was in the proportions authorized as per the scheme 
guidelines and terms and conditions of the grants-in-aid. 

(vii)  It has been ensured that the physical and financial performance under…………….(name of the scheme has 
been according to the requirements, as prescribed in the guidelines issued by Govt. of India and the 

performance/targets achieved statement for the year to which the utilization of the fund resulted in outcomes 
given at Annexure – I duly enclosed. 

(viii) The utilization of the fund resulted in outcomes given at Annexure – II duly enclosed (to be formulated by the 
Ministry/Department concerned as per their requirements/specifications.) 

(ix)  Details of various schemes executed by the agency through grants-in-aid received from the same Ministry or 
from other Ministries is enclosed at Annexure –II (to be formulated by the Ministry/Department concerned as 
per their requirements/specifications). 

 
Date: 
Place: 
 
 
Signature        Signature 
 
 
Name..........................................................    Name....................................................... 
 
Chief Finance Officer       Head of the Organisation 
(Head of the Finance) 
 
 
(Strike out inapplicable terms) 
 

 153 



 

 

GFR 12 – B 
[ See Rule 256 (2) ] 

 
FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE 

 
 
 
 
(1) Certified that out of the Loan of Rs. …….........…....……. SANCTIONED under…………………………………... 
dated…………………….…..,in favour of ………….....………….during the year……………………......an amount of 
Rs…………………………...has been utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned, and that the balance of 
Rs. ………...................remaining unutilized at the end of the year…………………….has been surrendered to the 
Government (vide No. ……….………., dated…………………..) / will be adjusted towards the loan payable during 
the next financial year. 
 
 
(2) Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the loan was sanctioned have been duly 
fulfilled/are being fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that the money was actually spent 
for the purpose for which the loan was made. 
 
Kinds of checks exercised  
 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
 

Signature…….….……………………. 
Designation …………………………. 
Date ………………………………….. 

 154 



 

 

GFR 12 – C 
[(See Rule 239)] 

 
 

FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE (FOR STATE GOVERNMENTS) 
(Where expenditure incurred by Govt. bodies only) 

 
 
 

Sl.  Amount  
No. Letter Certified that out of Rs……………………………………………...........Of 

No. and date grantssanctionedduringtheyear.................................infavourof 
   ..........................................................undertheMinistry/Department 

 

   Letter No. given in the margin and Rs…………………………..on 
 Account of unspent balance of the previous year, a sum of 
 Rs…………………………….has been utilized for the propose of 
 ............................................for which it was sanctioned and that 
 The balance of Rs…………………………..remaining unutilized 
 At the end of the year has been surrendered to 
 Government(vide No. 

Total ...........................dated.......................)/will be adjusted 
 

 towards the grants payable dur ing the next 
 year........................................ 

 

   
 

 
2. Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the grants-in-aid was sanctioned have 

been duly fulfilled/ are being fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that the money 
was actually utilized for the propose for which it was sanctioned. 

 
Kinds of checks exercised  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
 
 
 

Signature……………………………………… 
Designation…..……………………………….. 
Date…………………………………………… 

 
PS: The UC shall disclose separately the actual expenditure incurred and loans and advances given to suppliers 

of stores and assets, to construction agencies and like in accordance with scheme guidelines and in 
furtherance to the scheme objectives, which do not constitute expenditure at the stage. These shall be treated 
as utilized grants but allowed to be carried forward. 

 155 



 

 

FORM GFR 13 
[ See Rule 262] 

 
 

STATEMENT OF AGGREGATE BALANCE OF LOAN(S) OUTSTANDING AS  
ON 31ST MARCH, 20… AND DETAILS OF DEFAULTS 

 
 
 

PAO / Pr. AO   Ministry of ………………………………………Major Head……………………… 

 
 Sub-Major   Details of defaults Amount of default  
 Head   Earliest 

SI. Minor Head Name of the Aggregate Original letter Amount of Principal Interest date to 
No. of Account borrower outstanding No(s). and loan(s)   which the 

balance of Date(s) sanctioned   default 
loan(s) sanctioning the Rs. Rs. Rs. pertains 

loan(s) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

         

 

NOTE. - Statements may be prepared on separate sheets for each Major Head, with Minor Head-wise break-up. 
Parties having aggregate outstanding balances of less than Rs. 5 lakhs each and which are not defaulters may be 
grouped together with a common descriptive head such as “Regional Engineering Colleges”, etc., if possible or 
“parties with small outstanding balance” under Column 3. 

 156 



 

 

FORM GFR 14 
[ See Rule306 (3) ] 

 
 

FORM OF SECURITY BOND (FIDELITY BOND DEPOSITED AS SECURITY) 
 
 
 
 
KNOW ALL MEN BY these presents that I, A.B……………………… of……………………........and held and firmly 
bound unto the President of India, his successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as “Government”) in the sum 
of Rs………………(Rupees………….) to be paid to the Government for which payment, well and truly to be 
made, I bind myself, my heirs, executors, administrators, and legal representatives by these presents. Singed and 
dated this ……………………… day of……………….20 
2.  WHEREAS the above bounden A.B.........................................was on the day of........................................... 
20…………………… appointed to and now holds the office of ……………in the office of…………………… AND 
WHEREAS the said A.B………… by virtue of holding such office is bound to collect………………………… (here 
describe the nature of Cashier’s/ Storekeeper’s/Sub-storekeeper’s/Sub-ordinate’s duties) ………………………… 
and to keep and render true and faithful accounts of his dealings with all property and money which may come into 
his hands or possession under his control such accounts to be kept in the form and manner that may, from time to 
time, be prescribed by duly constituted authority, and also to prepare and submit such returns, accounts and other 
documents as may from time to time be required of him. 
3.AND WHEREAS the said A.B…………………...has, in pursuance of Rule 270 of the General Financial Rules, 
1963, delivered to and deposited with ……………… a Fidelity Bond issued by……………………Company for the 
sum of Rs………………… (Rupees………………….) as Security for the due and faithful performance by the said 
A.B……………………of the duties of his said office and of any other office requiring security to which he may be 
appointed at any time and of other duties which may be required of him while holding any office as aforesaid and 
for the purpose of securing and indemnifying the Government against all loss, injury, damage, costs, or expenses 
which the Government may, in any way, suffer, sustain or pay by reason of misconduct, neglect, oversight or any 
other act of omission of the said A.B……………………………or of any person or persons acting 
under him or for whom he may be responsible. 
4.  AND WHEREAS the said A.B……………………………………..has entered into the above Bond in the sum of 
……………………… conditioned for the due performance by him the said A.B……………………...of the duties of 
the said office and of other duties appertaining thereto or which may lawfully be required of him and to indemnify 
the Government against loss from or by reason of the acts or defaults of the said A.B……………………………… 
and of all and every person and persons aforesaid. 
5.NOW THE CONDITION of the above written Bond is such that of the said A.B……………………has whilst he 
has held the said office of………………………...as aforesaid always duly performed and fulfilled the duties of his 
said office and if he shall, whilst he shall hold the said office or any other office requiring security to which he may 
be appointed, or in which he may act, always duly perform and fulfil all and every duties thereof respectively and 
other duties which may from time to time be required of him while holding any such office as aforesaid, and shall 
duly pay into the Government Treasury at ………………………… all such money and securities for money as are 
payable or deliverable to Government and shall come into his possession or control by reason of the said office 
and shall duly account for and deliver up all moneys, papers and other property which shall come into his 
possession or control by reason of the said office and if the said A.B………….his heirs, executors, administrators 
or legal representatives shall pay or cause to be paid unto the Government the amount of any loss and /or 
defalcation in the accounts of the said ……………………………………………………. 
within 24 hours after the amount of such loss and /or defalcation shall have been demanded from the said 
A.B…………… by the………………………………such demand to be in writing and left at the office or last known 
place of residence of the said A.B…………………………and shall also at all times indemnify and save, and keep 
harmless the Government from all and every loss, injury, damage, actions, suits, proceedings, costs, charges and 
expenses which has been or shall or may at any time or times hereafter during the service or employment of the 
said A.B……………………… in such office as aforesaid, or any such offices aforesaid, be sustained, incurred, 
suffered brought, sued or commenced or paid by the Government by reason of any act, embezzlement, defalcation, 
mismanagement, neglect, failure, misconduct, default, disobedience, omission, or insolvency of the said 
A.B…………………………….or of any person or persons acting under him or for whom he 
may be responsible, then the above written Bond shall be void and of no effect, otherwise the same shall be and 
remain in full force. 
6.PROVIDED ALWAYS and it is hereby declared and agreed by and between the parties hereto that the said 
Fidelity Bond No…………….delivered and deposited as aforesaid shall be and remain at the disposal of the said 
officer for the time being or the Government as and for part and additional security over and above the above written 

 158 



 

Bond to the Government, for the indemnity and other purposes aforesaid with full power to the Government or an 
officer duly authorized in that behalf to obtain and receive payment of the sum or sums of money recoverable or to 
be received, upon or by virtue of the said Fidelity Bond or a sufficient portion thereof and all benefits and advantages 
thereof and to apply the same in and towards the indemnity as aforesaid of the Government. 
7.AND it is hereby further agreed and declared by and between the parties hereto that the said 
A.B……………………….shall keep the said Fidelity Bond issued by the said company in full force by payment of 
The premia and as when they fall due and by otherwise conforming to the rules of the said company relating thereto. 
8.PROVIDED ALWAYS that cancellation or lapse at any time of the said Fidelity Bond shall not be deemed to affect 
or prejudice the right of the Government to take proceedings upon or under this said Bond against the 
said……………………… in case any breach of the condition of this Bond shall be discovered after the cancellation 
or lapse of the said Fidelity Bond but the responsibility of the A.B…………………….shall at all times 
continue and but the Government shall be fully indemnified against all such loss or damage as aforesaid at any 
time. 
9. PROVIDED FURTHER that nothing herein contained nor in the Fidelity Bond so deposited shall be deemed to 
limit the liability of the said A.B…………………..in respect of matters aforesaid to the forfeiture of the said sum of 
Rupees………………… or part or parts thereof and that if the said sum be found insufficient to indemnify the 
Government in full for any loss or damage sustained by them in respect of matters aforesaid or any of them the 
said A.B……………………………………………shall pay to Government on demand such further sum as shall be 
deemed by…………………… to be necessary in addition to the said Fidelity Bond of Rs…………………………… 
to cover such loss or damage as aforesaid and that the Government shall be entitled to recover such further sum 
payable as aforesaid in any manner open to them. 
10. The stamp duty, if any, on this Bond shall be borne by the Government. 
 
 

Signature 
 
1. Signed and delivered by the above named A.B…………….. in the presence of ………………….. 
2. Signed for and on behalf of the President of India by ……………… the……………….being the person directed 
or authorized by him in that behalf in the presence of …………………… 

 159 



 

 

FORM GFR 15 
[ See Rule 253 (2) (ii) ] 

 
 

FORM OF WRITTEN UNDERTAKING TO BE EXECUTED BY AN UNDERTAKING / 
CORPORATION WHOLLY OWNED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 

AT THE TIME OF SANCTIONING OF A LOAN 
 
Memorandum of written undertaking given on the ……………… day of…………………………...two thousand and 
……………………… by a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 /the Companies Act, 1956,/ 
the Companies Act, 2013,having its registered office………………………….a body corporate incorporated 
under the same name and style and by under ……………… (Act No…………… of……………) having its office at 
……………………a society registered under the Societies Registration Act (21 of 1860) having its office 
at………………(hereinafter called ‘the Company / Corporation’ which expression shall include its successors and 
assigns) to the President of India (hereinafter called ‘the President’ which expression shall include his successors 
and assigns). 
WHEREAS the said Company / Corporation, etc., applied to the President for a loan of Rs………………………… 
(Rupees………………………) only. AND WHEREAS the President has agreed to lend an amount of Rs………… 
(Rupees………………………… only) to the said Company / Corporation, etc., on the terms and conditions 
prescribed in the Government of India, Ministry of ……………………… (Department of…………………….. ……..) 
Letter / Office Memorandum No……………………, dated…………………. (annexed). 
Now IT IS HEREBY AGREED by the said Company / Corporation, etc., that, in consideration of the sum of 
Rs……………… (Rupees………………… only) lent by the President to the Company / Corporation etc., the 
Company / Corporation, etc., hereby agree in accordance with the said terms and conditions – 
(i)To repay the loan in…………………………..annual equal instalments the first instalment repayable from the 
…………………… anniversary of the date of drawal; 
(ii)To pay interest at the rate or ………….……% per annum on the principal payable on each anniversary; and 
(iii)In case of default in the payment of the instalment of the loan in accordance with (i) above and / or interest in 
accordance with (ii) above, pay interest at penal rate of……………………………...% per annum on such overdue 
payments. 
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER AGREED AND DECLARED that the said Company / Corporation, etc., shall not, without 
the written consent of the President, encumber or alienate, create, any mortgage lien or charge by way of 
hypothecation, pledge otherwise, or create other encumbrances of any kind whatsoever any part of its land or 
buildings or other structure, and / or plant, machinery or any other fixed assets owned by them. 
AND IT IS HEREBY AGREED that the said principal amount lent by the President as aforesaid shall be used by 
the Company / Corporation, etc., only for the purpose or purposes for which the aforesaid amount was sanctioned 
and for no other purpose whatsoever. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed by the said Company / Corporation the day and year 
first above written. 
THE PRESIDENT of India has agreed to bear the stamp duty, if any, chargeable on this document. Signed for and 
on behalf of…………….Company / Corporation, etc., by 
 
Shri…………………………………….(Name and Designation) in the presence of 
 
1………………………………………..Seal of the Company / Corporation 
 
2. ……….……………………………… 

 160 



 

 

FORM GFR 16 
[ see Rule 286 (1) ] 

 
 

CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER OF CHARGE 
 
 
 
 
Certified that I /we have in the forenoon / afternoon of this day respectively made over and received charge of the 
Office………………………… in pursuance of Order No…………………......dated ………..……………....……... 
 
Received Officer …………………………    Relieving Officer ………………………… 
Signature …………………………………    Signature ………………………………… 
(Name in Block Letters)      (Name in Block Letters) 
Designation………………………………    Designation………………………………… 
Station ……………………………………    Station ……………………………………… 
Date ………………………………………    Date ………………………………………… 
 

 
(For use in Audit Office / PAO only) 

 
Noted in A/R at page ………………………… 
SO/AAO/AO/PAO 
Noted in A/R at page…………………………… 
SO/AAO/AO/PAO 
Forwarded  ………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
NOTE :- Separate certificate (as per Form appended) also to be used where transfer / assumption of charge 
involves responsibilities for Cash, Stores etc. 

 161 



 

 

FORM GFR 16 (APPENDIX) 
[ See Rule 286(1) ] 

 
 

CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER OF CHARGE IN RESPECT OF TRANSFER /  
ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CASH, STORES, ETC. 

 
 
 
Certified that I/we have in the forenoon / afternoon of this day……………[date to be indicated] respectively made 
over and assumed charge and responsibility of the following :- 
Cash Rs………………………………… 
Permanent advance Rs………………… 
Others…………………………………… 
 

Relieved Officer………………………….. 
Reliving Officer…………………………… 

 161 



 

 
 

FORM GFR 16A 
“Ministry / Department of …………………………. 

 
JOINING REPORT 

 
 
 
 
I hereby report myself for duty this day…………………………….forenoon / afternoon after availing of leave from 
…………........…… to …………….....……… sanctioned vide Ministry / Department of………………………..Order 
No……………, dated ………….…………… 
 

 
Signature …………………………… 

(Name in Block Letters)  
 
 

Designation…………………………. 

 162 



 

 

FORM GFR 17 
[ See Rule 306 (3) ] 

 
GENERAL INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 

FIDELITY GUARANTEE POLICY 
 
 
 
POLICY No. 
 
IN CONSIDERATION OF the first premium shown in the First Schedule and subject to the terms and conditions 
contained herein or endorsed herein which are to be deemed conditions precedent to any liability on the part of the 
Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter called “Corporation”) so far as they relate to anything to be done or 
complied with by the Employer, the Corporation agrees and binds itself to make good and reimburse to the Employer 
all such direct pecuniary loss not exceeding the amount of guarantee, as the Employer shall sustain by any act or 
acts of dishonesty, default or negligence committed by the employed / any of the employed (a) during the currency 
of this insurance and (b) during the uninterrupted continuance of employment of such employed and (c) in 
connection with his occupation and duties AND DISCOVERED during the currency of this insurance or within a 
reasonable time thereafter or within twelve months after determination of such employment whichever event shall 
first happen. 
The proposal for this insurance made by or on behalf of the Employer together with any correspondence relative 
thereto shall be incorporated herein and be the basis of this contract and of every renewal. 
 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
N a m e 

The Employer  Business  THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA  
The Employed : Address   through 
The amount of Guarantee Rs. 
Occupation and duties:  
The first premium Rs. 
The renewal date       The ………day of ……… in each year. 
 
The currency of this insurance: The period or periods from the date written against the respective names of the 
Employed to the then next renewal date and any year thereafter in respect to which the Corporation shall agree to 
accept and Employer or Employed shall pay the annual premium specified in the Second Schedule hereto. 
 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
 

Period of Name Occupation Amount of Annual Actual 
Risk and duties Guarantee Premium Premium 

   Rs. Rs. P. Rs. P. 

 

In witness whereof this Bond has been signed at …………......…… this day of ……………………20......... 
For1 …………………………........… 
Prepared by ………………………… 
Examined by………………………… 
N.B.-For your own protection it is incumbent upon you to read your policy and its conditions to ascertain that it is 
made out in accordance with your intentions. 
1 The name of the Company to be inserted in ink at the time of execution of this form. 

 163 



 

 
 
CONDITIONS 
In this policy the expression shall bear the respective meanings attached to them in the First Schedule hereto 
1. The Corporation shall not be liable to make any payment hereunder if the nature of the business of the Employer 

of the duties or conditions of service shall be changed or the remuneration or any of the Employed reduced 
without the sanction of the Corporation or if the precautions and checks for securing accuracy of accounts shall 
not be duly observed. 

2. Notice in writing shall be given to the Corporation’s office as soon as possible after any act or acts of dishonesty, 
default or negligence on the part of any of the employed or of reasonable cause of suspicion thereof or any 
improper conduct shall have come to the knowledge of the Employer or of any representatives of the employer 
to whom is entrusted the duty of superintendence over any of the Employed and no amount shall be payable 
under this policy in respect of that Employed by reason of any act committed after such knowledge shall have 
come to the Employer or his said representatives. Within three months after such notice the Employer shall 
deliver to the Corporation full details of his claim and shall furnish proof of the correctness of such claim. All 
books of accounts of the Employer or any Accountant’s report thereon shall be open to the inspection of the 
Corporation and the Employer shall give all information and assistance to enable the Corporation to sue for and 
obtain reimbursement by any one of the Employed or by his estate of any moneys which the Corporation shall 
have paid or become liable to pay under this Policy. Provided always that the Corporation shall not be entitled 
to the disclosure of any record or information in respect of which the Employer is entitled to claim privilege in a 
Court of Law under Sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act. 

3. Any moneys of any one of the Employed in respect of whom a claim is made in the hands of the Employer and 
any money which but for any act of fraud or dishonesty committed by such one of Employed would have been 
due to that Employed from the Employer shall be deducted from the amount otherwise payable under the Policy. 
Provided that the Employee is entitled under the law to make such deduction. Provided further that in cases in 
which the loss to the Employer is in excess of the maximum amount payable under the policy, the moneys 
aforesaid will be applied in the first place to make good the amount of such excess and the balance, if any, shall 
be deducted as herein provided. The Employer and the Corporation shall share any other recovery (excluding 
insurance and reinsurance and any counter security taken by Corporation) made by either on account of any 
loss in the proportions that the amount of the loss borne by each bears to the total amount of the loss. 

4. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary it is also agreed that the Corporation guarantees to 
the Employer that the Employed shall honestly and faithfully account to the Employer for all moneys or valuables 
or property which they shall receive or be entrusted with on account of the Employer either in their personal or 
individual capacity or as member of group working conjointly with other members and that the Corporation will 
make good and reimburse to the Employer such loss not exceeding the amount of guarantee as the Employer 
may sustain by any act or acts of default or dishonesty or negligence of the Employed in the capacity and 
employment aforesaid and that when individual liability cannot be brought home to the Employed the amount to 
be made good shall be that which falls to the share of the Employed calculating from the total number of men 
forming such group, i.e., the total loss divided by the total number of men employed on the particular work. 

5. The Corporation also agrees that during the period in which the guarantee shall be in force the particulars 
contained in the Second Schedule shall be with the consent of Employer and on previous notice to and on 
payment to the Corporation of any additional proportionate premium that may become payable in consequence 
of any change in the employed by reason of promotion or otherwise be varied as circumstances may require 
and such additional persona as may be taken into the employment of the employer referred to in the Schedule 
hereof during such period shall with such consent aforesaid and on previous notice to and on payment to the 
Corporation of a further proportionate premium at the rate for the time being applicable be added to and included 
in the said Schedule and the expression Employed used throughout this policy shall as from the respective date 
on which the names shall be included in the said schedule be deemed to include all persons whether previously 
named in the said Schedule or subsequently added thereto as aforesaid. 

6. If any question or difference shall arise between the parties hereto or their respective representatives touching 
these presents or the construction hereof or as to the rights, duties or obligations of any persons hereunder or 
as to any other matter in anywise arising out of or connected with the subject-matter of these presents, the same 
shall be referred to a single Arbitrator to be named by the Government of India. The Arbitrator so named shall 
be an officer of Government and shall have all the powers conferred on Arbitrators under the Indian Arbitration 
Act. The costs of the reference and award shall be in the discretion of the Arbitrator. The making of an award in 
such reference shall be a condition precedent to any liability of the Corporation or any right of action against the 
Corporation in respect of such difference. If the Corporation shall disclaim liability for any claim hereunder and 
such claim shall not within twelve calendar months from the date of such disclaimer have been referred to 
arbitration under the provision herein contained then the claim shall for all purpose be deemed to have been 
abandoned and shall not thereafter be recoverable hereunder. 

7. The expression "Government of India" for the purpose of Clause 6 above shall mean the Secretary to the 
Government of India in the Administrative Ministry/ Head of Department under which the employed is working. 

 164 



 

 

FORM GFR 18 
[ See Rule 211. (ii) (c) ] 

 
 

ACCESSION REGISTER 
 
 
 

 
Date Acces Author Title Vol. Place Year Pages Sourc Class Book Cost Bill With Re- 

sion and of e No. No. No. drawn marks 
Num- Publi- Publi- and date 
ber sher cation date 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) 

               

 166 



 

FORM GFR 19 
[ See Rule250. (1) (viii) ] 

 
NOTICE TO BORROWER ABOUT THE DUE DATE  

FOR REPAYMENT OF LOAN AND INTEREST THEREON 
 
 
 
 
No……………………… 
Office of the Controller of Accounts, Ministry / Department of ………….......…… New Delhi, dated the…….......…. 
 
To …………………………… 
…………………………...….. 
 
Subject :-Repayment of loan and payment of interest thereon. 
Dear Sir, 
According to the terms of the loan of Rs………………………….sanctioned to you, vide the Ministry / Department 
………………………… Letter No……………………, dated………………………… the annual repayment instalment 
and / or interest thereon, detailed below, will become due on………………………… 

(i) Repayment ……………………… Rs…………………(in words and figures) 
(ii) Interest …………………………… Rs………………..(in words and figures) 

2.Please arrange the payment by the due date. It should be noted that the amount of interest has been calculated 
on the assumption that payment will be arranged promptly; otherwise it will be revised upwards in accordance 
with the terms of the loan. 

3.The amounts due should be tendered, on or before the due date at the………………………...(New Delhi Head 
Office / Main Office of the Public Sector Bank (PSB) accredited to the Ministry / Department in cash or by cheque 
or draft drawn on any Scheduled Bank / New Delhi, in favour of the aforesaid PSB Branch. The payment should 
be accompanied by a memorandum or challan, in duplicate, giving the following details :- 
(i)   Name of the Ministry / Department……………………………… 
(ii)  Name of the Borrower ………………………………………… 
(iii)  No. and date of loan sanction letter with the loan amount sanctioned …………………………. 
(iv) Amount due for payment, separately for interest and payment………………………… 
(v)  Due date of payment…………………………… 
(vi) The head of the account indicated below, to which the amounts will be adjusted in Government accounts, 
should be included in the challan: 

 
(i) Instalment of Principal.       Head of Account 
(ii)  Interest. 

 
4.Separate cheque / draft and challans should be submitted for payment of principal and interest. 
5.For outstation loanees, payment of dues together with memorandum / challans is to be arranged through 

theirBank to the aforesaid PSB Branch in New Delhi by the due date. 
 

Yours faithfully  
 
 

Accounts Officer 

 167 



 

 

FORM GFR 20 
[See Rule 305 (1) ] 

 
REGISTER OF POLICY HOLDER 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 1 Sl No 
  
 2 Policy No. 
  
 3 Name of Policy Holder 
 
 4 Designation 
 
 5 Monthly Premium rate 
 
 6 April 
 
 7 May 
  
 8 June 
 
 9 July 
 
 10 August 
 
 11 September 
 
 12 October 
  
 13 November 
 
 14 December 
 
 15 January 
 
 16 February 
 
 17 March 
 
 18 Remarks 
 

 168 

Amount actually recovered 



 

FORM GFR 21 
[ See Rule 234 ] 

 
 

REGISTER OF GRANTS TO BE MAINTAINED BY THE SANCTIONING AUTHORITY 
 
 
 

(i) Serial Number. 
(ii) Number and date of sanction letter. 
(iii) Purpose of grant. 
(iv) Conditions, if any, attached to the grant. 
(v) Amount sanctioned. 
(vi) Amount of the Bill. 
(vii) Whether conditions attached to the grant have been accepted by the grantee without reservation.  
(viii) Dated initials of the sanctioning authority. 
(ix) Date by which statements of accounts along with utilization certificate, etc., are required to be furnished by 

the grantee. 
(x) Date by which utilization certificate is required to be furnished by sanctioning authority to the Accounts 

Officer, as the case may be. 
(xi) Date by which the statements of accounts, etc., are actually received. (In case there has been delay in the 

receipt of these statements, the reasons therefor as well as efforts made by the sanctioning authority to 
expedite submission of such statements may be clearly indicated). 

(xii) Date of submission of utilization certificate to PAO (in case there has been delay in submission of utilization 
certificate, the reasons therefor may be clearly indicated). 

(xiii)Unspent balance, if any, also indicating whether the unspent balance has been surrendered by the grantee 
Institution / Organisation. 

 169 



 

FORM GFR - 22 
[ See Rule211 (ii) (a) ] 

 
REGISTER OF FIXED ASSETS 

 
Name and description of the Fixed Assets.......................................... 

 
 
 
 

      
Date   Particulars  Particulars of supplier Cost of Location of the Remarks 

of Asset the Asset Asset 
Name and Bill No.    
address and date 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

NOTE : The items of similar nature but having significant distinctive features (e.g. study table, office table, computer 
table, etc.) should be accounted for separately in stock. 

 170 



 

FORM GFR 23 
[ See Rule211 (ii) (b) ] 

 
 

STOCK REGISTER OF CONSUMABLES SUCH AS STATIONERY,  
CHEMICALS, SPARE PARTS ETC. 

 
Name of Article............................................ Unit of Accounts ......................................... 

 
 

        
Date Particulars Suppliers Receipt Issue Issue Balance Unit  

  Invoice No.  Voucher    Price 
  and Date  No.    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

 
NOTE : User’s indent in original shall be treated as issue voucher. Issue voucher number shall be in consecutive 
order, financial year wise and it should be noted on each indent. 

 171 



 

FORM GFR 24 
[ See Rule211 (ii) (d) ] 

 
 

REGISTER OF ASSETS OF HISTORICAL / ARTISTIC VALUE 
 

Name of Asset....................................... 

 
Date of Source of Cost price,  Particulars which  Particulars of  Location  Remarks 

acquisition acquisition if any make it an asset of the custodian  of the  
historic /artistic value of the asset asset 

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

 

NOTE 1 : The custodian shall take appropriate measures for preservation of the assets. 
NOTE 2 : The present value of the asset should be ascertained by obtaining appropriate valuation from an expert 
agency and the same is indicated in Column 3, every five years. 

 172 



 

FORM GFR 25 
[ See Rule 281. (2) & (3) ] 

 
 

GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES 
Name of Ministry /  
Department           [ Rs. In crore ] 
 

SI. Beneficiary Loan Authority  Period of Purpose Class Sector Details  Details  Amount 
No. [Name of  Holder / for validity of Loan of of of Loan 

the PSU etc Entity Guarantee [ MOF ID No., Reschedul Securities 
in whose  giving  [MoF & date through e pledged 

favour Loan approval which the 
guarantee  No. & Date] guarantee was 
is given] last extended] 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

           

 

 
Extent of Additions Deletions Invoked Outstanding Rate of Guarantee Fee/ Other 

Guarantee Principal, Guarantee Commission conditions 
interest etc at Fee/ & 

Dis- Not  Receiv- Recei- 
charged dis- the end of  Commi- able ved compli- 

charged the period ssion ance 

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 

            

 

NOTES - 1 : For the purpose of Column - 8 the sectors are as under :- 
(i) Power (ii) Cooperative (iii) Irrigation (iv) Roads & Transport (v) Urban Development & Housing (vi) Other 
Infrastructure (vii) Any other. 2 : For the purpose of Column - 7 the classification is indicated in Rule 281 (4). 

 173 

Principal 

Interest 

Total 



 

FORM GFR 26 
[ See Rule277(v). ] 

 
 

FURNISHING OF DATA REGARDING GUARANTEES TO  
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 

 
 
Name of the Ministry/Department : 
 
Name of Public Sector Undertaking / entity : 

 
Year Turnover Profit Sundry Current If audited by In case of 

After tax Debtors Ratio CAG, profit after targets set 
tax, taking into by BIFR the 
account the same for 
comments of Turnover and 
CAG Profit. 

X-2       

X-1       

X*       

Where ‘X’ is the immediate preceding financial year. 
 
2. In case of proposal seeking extension of guarantee it may specifically be indicated whether the guarantee fee 
for the preceding financial year has been paid or not. The amount paid and date of payment should be indicated. 
In case of default in payment it may be indicated whether default fee in terms of Rule 279 (3) has been levied. 
 
 

 174